=== PDF: pilmeyer-2024.pdf ===

[NeuroImage: Clinical 44 (2024) 103682](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl.2024.103682)
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
NeuroImage: Clinical
(https://www.elsevier.com/locate/ynicl)
Multi-modal MRI for objective diagnosis and outcome prediction in depression
Jesper Pilmeyer a,b,*, Rolf Lamerichs a,b,c, Sjir Schielen a, Faroeq Ramsaransing a,b,d,
Vivianne van Kranen-Mastenbroek e,f,g, Jacobus F.A. Jansen a,e,h, Marcel Breeuwer a,i,
Svitlana Zinger a,b
a Department of Electrical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, Groene Loper 19, 5612 AE Eindhoven, the Netherlands
b Department of Research and Development, Epilepsy Centre Kempenhaeghe, Sterkselseweg 65, 5590 AB Heeze, the Netherlands
c Department of Medical Image Acquisitions, Philips Research, High Tech Campus 34, 5656 AE Eindhoven, the Netherlands
d Department of Psychiatry, Amsterdam University Medical Center, Meibergdreef 5, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, the Netherlands
e Mental Health and Neuroscience Research Institute, Maastricht University, Minderbroedersberg 4-6, 6211 LK Maastricht, the Netherlands
f Academic Center for Epileptology, Kempenhaeghe and Maastricht University Medical Centre, Heeze and Maastricht, the Netherlands
g Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, Maastricht University Medical Centre, P. Debyelaan 25, 6229 HX Maastricht, the Netherlands
h Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Centre, P. Debyelaan 25, 6229 HX Maastricht, the Netherlands
i Department of Biomedical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, Groene Loper 5, 5612 AE Eindhoven, the Netherlands
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Major depressive disorder 1
Prognosis 2
Multi-modal 3
MRI 4
Machine learning 5
A B S T R A C T
Research Purpose: The low treatment effectiveness in major depressive disorder (MDD) may be caused by the
subjectiveness in clinical examination and the lack of quantitative tests. Objective biomarkers derived from
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may support clinical experts during decision-making. Numerous studies have
attempted to identify such MRI-based biomarkers. However, the majority is uni-modal (based on a single MRI
modality) and focus on either MDD diagnosis or outcome. Uncertainty remains regarding whether key features or
classification models for diagnosis may also be used for outcome prediction. Therefore, we aim to find multimodal predictors of both, MDD diagnosis and outcome. By addressing these research questions using the same
dataset, we eliminate between-study confounding factors.
Various structural (T 1 -weighted, T 2 -weighted, diffusion tensor imaging (DTI)) and functional (resting-state and
task-based functional MRI) scans were acquired from 32 MDD and 31 healthy control (HC) subjects during the
first visit at the investigational site (baseline). Depression severity was assessed at baseline and 6 months later.
Features were extracted from the baseline MRI images with different modalities. Binary 6-months negative and
positive outcome (NO; PO) classes were defined based on relative (to baseline) change in depression severity.
Support vector machine models were employed to separate MDD from HC (diagnosis) and NO from PO subjects
(outcome). Classification was performed through a uni-modal (features from a single MRI modality) and multimodal (combination of features from different modalities) approach.
Principal Results: Our results show that DTI features yielded the highest uni-modal performance for diagnosis and
outcome prediction: mean diffusivity (AUC (area under the curve) = 0.701) and the sum of streamline weights
(AUC = 0.860), respectively. Multi-modal ensemble classifiers with T 1 -weighted, resting-state functional MRI
and DTI features improved classification performance for both diagnosis and outcome (AUC = 0.746 and 0.932,
respectively). Feature analyses revealed that the most important features were located in frontal, limbic and
parietal areas. However, the modality or location of these features was different between diagnostic and prog­
nostic models.
Abbreviations: MDD, major depressive disorder; HC, healthy control; NO, negative outcome; PO, positive outcome; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; fMRI,
functional MRI; DTI, diffusion tensor imaging; FA, fractional anisotropy; MD, mean diffusivity; AD, axial diffusivity; RD, radial diffusivity; FC, functional connec­
tivity; DSM-5, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders version 5; HDRS, Hamilton Depression Rating Scale; RSN, resting-state network; ICA, inde­
pendent component analysis; CSD, constrained spherical deconvolution; ACT, anatomically constrained tractography; WCA, wavelet coherence analysis; ACC/PCC,
anterior/posterior cingulate cortex; DMN, default mode network.
- Corresponding author.
E-mail address: (mailto:j.pilmeyer@tue.nl)
(https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl.2024.103682)
Received 9 July 2024; Received in revised form 18 September 2024; Accepted 1 October 2024
Available online 10 October 2024
[2213-1582/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
J. Pilmeyer et al. NeuroImage: Clinical 44 (2024) 103682
Major Conclusions: Our findings suggest that combining features from different MRI modalities predict MDD
diagnosis and outcome with higher performance. Furthermore, we demonstrated that the most important fea­
tures for MDD diagnosis were different and located in other brain regions than those for outcome. This longi­
tudinal study contributes to the identification of objective biomarkers of MDD and its outcome. Follow-up studies
may further evaluate the generalizability of our models in larger or multi-center cohorts.
**1. Introduction**
Approximately one out of six people will experience a depressive
episode during their lifetime (Malhi and Mann, 2018). Despite a high
impact on daily functioning and quality of life, treatment effectiveness
of major depressive disorder is still relatively low, with no less than twothirds of the patients remaining symptomatic after first-line treatment
and about a third not achieving remission after finishing four subsequent
treatments (Holtzheimer and Mayberg, 2011; Malhi and Mann, 2018).
One of the underlying causes for this may be the subjective decisionmaking by clinical experts.
In order to support these critical judgements with more objective
measures, numerous researchers have attempted to discover biomarkers
for diagnosis, prognosis and treatment navigation purposes (Abi-Darg­
ham and Horga, 2016; Hacimusalar and Es¸el, 2018; Kang and Cho,
2020). A common approach is through magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), which can provide structural and functional insights into the
brain. Common MRI modalities include T 1 -weighted, T 2 -weighted,
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and functional MRI (fMRI). Findings have
linked structural (Abe et al., 2010; Atkinson et al., 2014; Brown et al.,
2019; Cole et al., 2011; Grieve et al., 2016; Hamilton et al., 2008;
Korgaonkar et al., 2014; Kraus et al., 2019; Samuels et al., 2015) and
functional (Dai et al., 2019; Dichter et al., 2015; Lener and Iosifescu,
2015; Perlman et al., 2019; Stuhrmann et al., 2011) abnormalities to
MDD and its treatment outcome. However, consistent depression bio­
markers remain elusive (Atkinson et al., 2014; McKinnon et al., 2009)
due to, amongst others, varying study designs, participant selection, and
MRI protocols, as well as MDD symptom heterogeneity (Malhi and
Mann, 2018).
Multi-modal MRI studies can mitigate part of these challenges by
identification of biomarkers across different domains. Currently, multimodal MRI research in MDD is scarce. Two recent studies achieved 73.5
% and 86.7 % accuracy in classifying MDD patients versus healthy
controls (HCs) through combination of brain region volumes, cortical
thickness, FC, and FA (Li et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023). Similar
findings have been reported in studies focusing on prediction on
remission and treatment outcome (Ma et al., 2023; Poirot et al., 2024).
For example, a recent multi-site study including 229 MDD patients,
predicted sertraline treatment response at 8 weeks with an AUC of 0.73
(Poirot et al., 2024). Crucially, integration of MRI measures derived
from T 1 -weighted, resting-state fMRI, DTI and arterial spin labeling
scans, demonstrated higher performance compared to a single modality.
A limitation of these studies is that they focused on either diagnosis
or outcome prediction. Currently, it is unknown whether diagnostic
findings can also be utilized for outcome prediction. It is crucial to
investigate both research questions since future prognostic biomarker
studies may benefit (or not) from formulating hypotheses, replicating
models or defining regions-of-interest based on diagnostic findings and
vice versa. However, comparison between studies is not straightforward
due to differences in e.g. selection criteria and acquisition parameters.
By conducting these experiments on a single dataset, are eliminated and
findings can be compared more easily. The current multi-modal MRI
study is the first, according to the authors’ knowledge, to objectively
classify both, MDD and its outcome.
Additionally, most prognostic MDD studies compared between
groups of patients receiving different treatments and control groups.
These patients are often recruited in specialized mental health care,
resulting in a sample that may not resemble the general MDD population
as the depression severity and treatment use is relatively homogeneous
(Schmaal et al., 2015). Therefore, we conducted our study in a natu­
ralistic setting, including patients with varying depression severity,
(mild to more chronic), depression history (no or multiple remissions)
and treatment use. As such design captures more of the heterogeneity,
findings and models may be more generalizable to the general MDD
population.
In this study, MDD and HC participants receiving no, psychotherapy,
and/or medication treatment were scanned at baseline. Symptom
severity of the former group was re-assessed at 6-months follow-up.
Features derived from T 1 - and T 2 -weighted, fMRI and diffusion MRI
scans were fed to machine learning models. These included relatively
novel features, such as amygdalar and hippocampal subregion volumes,
functional measures reflecting different types of brain network in­
teractions, and more biologically representative connectivity measures
assessed along white matter tracts. Linear support vector machine
(SVM) models were implemented to distinguish MDD from HC partici­
pants and MDD participants with a 6-months positive outcome (PO)
from those with a negative outcome (NO), labeled by changes in
symptom severity. Based on the state-of-the-art literature, We expected
the highest diagnostic and prognostic performance from combining
features across MRI modalities in the frontolimbic areas.
**2. Material and methods**
This section describes the conducted steps from participant inclusion
until classification performance estimation for the uni- and multi-modal
approaches. First, participant selection and inclusion results are dis­
played, followed by the estimation of clinical assessments to define the
outcome group. Then, the MRI acquisition, pre-processing and feature
extraction methods are explained. Finally, classification for the uni- and
multi-modal details are provided, followed by a section describing the
elaborate analyses to evaluate the most important features. A graphic
overview can be found in Fig. 1.
2.1. Participants
A total of 63 subjects participated in the study: 32 adults with
confirmed MDD diagnosis (age 43.8 ± 13.4 years, 12/20 male/females)
and 31 age- and sex-matched healthy controls (age 40.4 ± 15.5 years,
11/20 male/females). For participant demographics and depressionrelated information, see Table 1 below. From the MDD group, 22 pa­
tients received one or two types of antidepressants at baseline (11 se­
lective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, 7 serotonin and norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitors, 3 noradrenaline and specific serotonergic antide­
pressants, 3 tricyclic antidepressants and 1 serotonin antagonist and
reuptake inhibitors). A total of 24 patients received a form of psycho­
therapy (including conversations with a psychologist/psychiatrist, psy­
chotherapy, Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing, systemic
therapy or group therapy) within the month before baseline. Two of
those received cognitive behavioral therapy. Four patients did not
receive any psychotherapy or pharmacological treatment.
Participants were selected based on several selection criteria. The
inclusion criterium for both groups was (I) age between 18 and 65 years
old. For the MDD group, an additional inclusion criterium was (II) a
diagnosis of unipolar MDD (according to the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders version 5 (American Psychiatric Associa­
tion, 2013); DSM-5) as assessed through the Mini International
2
J. Pilmeyer et al. NeuroImage: Clinical 44 (2024) 103682
van Vliet
Neuropsychiatric Interview by board-certified psychiatrists (
and de Beurs, 2007). Exclusion criteria for all participants were (I) any
concurrent neurological or psychiatric disorder; (II) current substance or
alcohol abuse; (III) a history of psychosis, autism spectrum disorder,
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder or (mild) intellectual disability;
(IV) any contra-indication for MRI (non-compatible brain MRI tattoos or
implants, pregnancy, claustrophobia); (V) previous or current treatment
with electroconvulsive therapy, deep-brain stimulation or transcranial
magnetic stimulation. Additional exclusion criteria specifically for MDD
were (VI) more than 3 previous MDD episodes (excluding the current
one); (VII) a current MDD episode lasting longer than 2 years. An
additional exclusion criterium for the HC group was (VIII) a current or
previous episode of MDD according to the DSM-5.
All participants gave written informed consent to participate
voluntarily in this study minimally a week after being informed about
the study procedures. The study was approved (NL73949.015.20) by the
Medical Ethical Review Commission Maxima Medical Centre, Veld­
hoven, the Netherlands (W20.054) on September 28th in 2020. The
clinical study is registered at (http://clinicaltrials.gov) with identifier
NCT05701267.
2.2. Clinical assessments
The depression severity was assessed with the Hamilton Depression
Rating Scale (HDRS) 17-items (Hamilton, 1960) at the beginning of the
study (first visit at the investigational site, further on referred to as
baseline) and 6-months after baseline. This questionnaire assesses
various symptoms associated with MDD and ranges between 0 and 52,
where a higher value indicates a more severe depressive episode. The
relative change in HDRS from follow-up to baseline was calculated to
divide participants into groups of PO or NO as later explained in Section
$\textquotedblleft \textquotedblright$
2.6 .
Classification
Participants received treatment as usual, i.e. by prescription of their
external clinical expert (psychologists or psychiatrists), or no treatment.
That is, in this study we did not alter their treatment plan, referred to as
a naturalistic setting. Treatment of MDD subjects varied between psy­
chotherapy, pharmacotherapy, a combination thereof or no treatment at
all.
a p-value calculated from a two-sample t -test (normal distribution); b p-value
calculated from a Mann-Whitney U test (non-normal distribution); c  HDRS score
at baseline is shown for the diagnosis group and HDRS score at 6-months followup is shown for the outcome group; χ  p-value calculated from a χ 2  test. Abbre­
viations: HDRS = Hamilton Depression Rating Scale; HC = healthy control; MDD
= major depressive episode.
2.3. MRI acquisition
MRI scans were acquired with a Philips 3 T Achieva dStream (Philips
Healthcare, Best, the Netherlands) at the Expertise Centre For Epilepsy
and Sleep Disorders Kempenhaeghe (Heeze, the Netherlands). The
following MRI modalities were obtained: T 1 -weighted, high-resolution
**Table 1**
Demographic and clinical information of the subject group at baseline and for
both, the positive and negative outcome group at 3-months and 6-months
follow-up. Normality of distributions was tested using a Shapiro-Wilk test.
**Diagnosis** **Outcome (at 6-months)**
Variable \
outcome
HC MDD p Positive
outcome
Negative
outcome
p
$**n** 31 32 - 12 19 - **Age (years)** 40.4 43.8 0.37 b 40.3 \pm 46.8 \pm$
$\pm \pm 14.4 12.3$
15.5 13.4
46.8 ±
12.3
0.19 a
0.37 b 40.3 ±
14.4
**Female/Male** 20 /
11
$0.75 \chi 9 / 3 11 / 8 0.078 \chi$
**Education**
**level (1** – **5)**
1.94
±
0.80
43.8
±
13.4
20 /
12
1.50
±
0.88
24.4
±
4.62
0.06 b 1.67 ±
0.98
0.25 b
**0.00** ****** a
**0.043** **b**
0.45 a
0.56 b
10.8 ±
3.36
**HDRS score** **c** 0.67
±
1.37
**0.00** ***** **
a
1.31 ±
0.75
18.7 ±
4.66
2.26 ±
0.65
12.1 ±
6.21
34.9 ±
13.1
**n lifetime**
**MDD**
**episodes**
**Duration**
**current**
**episode**
**(months)**
**First MDD**
**onset (years)**
− 2.03
±
0.69
− 11.5
±
6.33
− 33.8
±
13.4
$- 1.75 \pm$
0.62
$- 10.3 \pm$
6.69
$- 32.5 \pm$
14.8
**Fig. 1. Study workflow** 1) 32 major depressive disorder (MDD) and 31 healthy control (HC) subjects participated in the study. The depression severity of the MDD
group was obtained at day 1 and after 6 months to define outcome groups. 2) Pre-processing of anatomical and functional scans was performed. 3) In total, 11
different feature sets were obtained: T 1 -weighted, T 2 -weighted, static functional connectivity (sFC), number of coherence clusters (nCC), lead coherence (leadCoh),
activity (Act), sum of streamline weights (sSW), fractional anisotropy (FA), and mean/axial/radial diffusivity (MD/AD/RD). 4) For each set, linear support vector
machine (SVM) classifiers were applied, combined with double feature selection in a nested leave-one-out cross-validation approach. 5) Feature sets were combined
to test multi-modal classifiers using 3 different methods. 6) An elaborate feature analysis was conducted to assess the highest feature (element) contributions.
Abbreviations: fMRI = functional magnetic resonance imaging; DTI = diffusion tensor imaging.
3
J. Pilmeyer et al. NeuroImage: Clinical 44 (2024) 103682
T 2 -weighted (field-of-view of the amygdala and hippocampus), restingstate and task-based fMRI, and DTI. Scan parameters can be found in
Supplementary Materials 1.1. External cardiac and respiratory signals
were obtained using a photoplethysmographic unit placed on a finger
and a respiratory belt placed on the abdomen, respectively.
An adapted version of the Hariri task was performed during the taskbased fMRI scan to assess emotion processing (Hariri et al., 2002).
Participants were instructed to match shapes or angry/fearful faces with
a target using a button press. In total, there were 7 blocks of rest, 6
blocks of shapes, and 6 blocks of faces, each lasting 27 s (20 volumes).
Stimuli were presented for 3 s with an inter-stimulus interval of 1 s. See
Supplementary Figure S1.
2.4. MRI processing
This section highlights the most crucial processing steps performed
to denoise the MRI data before extraction of the classification input
features. More details can be found in Supplementary Materials Section
1.2.
T 1 -weighted brain (sub)region volumes and cortical thickness mea­
(https://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/fswiki/recon-all)
(https://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/fswiki/recon-all)
lar nuclei were extracted from the high-resolution T 2 -weighted scan and
T 1 -weighted scan (Iglesias et al., 2016, 2015; Saygin et al., 2017).
fMRI preprocessing was performed using Statistical Parametric
[Mapping software (SPM12, https://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/, RRID:](https://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/)
SCR_007037) and additional functions from the FMRIB Software Library
v6.0 (FSL, RRID:SCR_002823) package (Jenkinson et al., 2012). In short,
initial steps included slice-timing correction and realignment. Then,
‘optimal’ multi-echo combination was applied (Posse et al., 1999) to
combine the fMRI data acquired at different TEs. Subsequently, the T 1 weighted scan was co-registered to the fMRI scan, and segmented into
separate tissue classes including white and gray matter (WM;GM) and
cerebral spinal fluid. Images were spatially normalized to Montreal
Neurological Institute space. This was followed by regression of con­
founding time-series from WM and cerebral spinal fluid, bandpass filter
between 0.01 and 0.2 Hz cutoffs (Pilmeyer et al., 2023) and spatial
smoothing with a 5 mm full-width at half-maximum kernel.
Functional resting-state brain networks (RSNs) were extracted using
group independent component analysis (ICA) with the Group ICA of
fMRI Toolbox (GIFT v3.0c, (https://icatb.sourceforge.net/)
SCR_001953. A number of 35 ICs was found to be the optimal number of
components to not split RSNs into subnetworks or obtain merged RSNs
within a single component (Wang et al., 2011). 15 RSNs were identified
(Supplementary Figure S2) from the 35 ICs based on a goodness-of-fit
approach (Bernas et al., 2018) between ICs and the RSN atlas of Smith
et al (Smith et al., 2009). Visual inspection was used to verify the
automated identification process. These included the primary visual
network (pVN), lateral visual network (latVN), occipital visual network
(oVN), default mode network (DMN), cerebellum network (CN),
sensorimotor network (SMN), auditory network (AN) and left and right
frontoparietal network (l/rFPN). The DMN was further separated into
the whole, anterior and posterior components (DMN, aDMN and
pDMN), and the SMN also contained a lateral SMN (latSMN) component.
Visual inspection identified 3 additional networks that are not part of
the Smith et al. atlas: the salience network (SN), basal ganglia network
(BN) and dorsal attention network (DAN) were identified based on
previous RSN studies (Bharti et al., 2022; Mueller et al., 2014; Shi et al.,
2020; Sorg et al., 2013).
DTI images were processed using MRtrix3 (Tournier et al., 2019) and
FSL (Jenkinson et al., 2012). Images were denoised and corrected for
distortions. Non-brain tissue was removed, and fiber orientation distri­
bution maps were estimated through multi-shell, multi-tissue con­
strained spherical deconvolution (CSD) (Jeurissen et al., 2014).
Following generation of a GM-WM boundary mask, anatomically con­
strained tractography (ACT) was applied to ensure streamlines were
anatomically and biologically plausible (Smith et al., 2012). A total of 20
million streamlines was generated after which weights were assigned to
each streamline (SIFT2) (Smith et al., 2015). These weights are based on
minimizing the difference between the streamline density and the esti­
mated fiber density from the diffusion model to reflect the underlying
biological connectivity (Smith et al., 2022).
2.5. Feature extraction
A total of 11 different feature sets was extracted from the different
MRI modalities. This section describes the extraction thereof. An over­
view of the feature sets and the number of feature elements can be found
in Supplementary Table S1. More details and motivations can be found
in Supplementary Materials Section 1.3.
2.5.1. T 1 -weighted
Volumes of 43 subcortical structures and other brain regions (Fischl
et al., 2002), and the cortical thickness of 68 cortical structures were
obtained (Desikan et al., 2006). Thus, a total of 113 elements were ob­
tained for the T 1 -based feature set.
2.5.2. T 2 -weighted
The volumes of 44 hippocampal subfields and 20 amygdalar nuclei
were extracted (Iglesias et al., 2016, 2015; Saygin et al., 2017), resulting
in a total of 66 elements.
2.5.3. DTI
Five measures of structural connectivity matrices were obtained
from white matter tracts between 84 subcortical and cortical regions
(Desikan et al., 2006; Fischl et al., 2002). Mean diffusivity (MD), FA,
axial diffusivity (AD) and radial diffusivity (RD) and sum of streamline
weights (sSW) were obtained for each unique connection, resulting in
3486 elements for each of the 5 DTI features. The sSW feature is a more
biologically accurate measure of white matter density (Smith et al.,
2015).
2.5.4. Task-based fMRI
From general linear models including regressors for each condition
and several confounders, activation contrast maps (t-values) were ob­
tained between the Faces > Shapes and Faces > Rest conditions. The
average contrast was calculated for 11 ROIs and the 2 pairs of condi­
tions, resulting in 22 elements.
2.5.5. Resting-state fMRI
Static FC was calculated between each unique pair of RSNs, resulting
in 105 elements. Furthermore, wavelet coherence analysis (WCA) was
performed, which assesses the temporally changing interactions be­
tween RSNs. Two features were derived from WCA: lead coherence
(leadCoh) and the number of coherence clusters (nCC) as described by
Cîrstian et al. using the same parameters (Cîrstian et al., 2023). LeadCoh
reflects a causal effect between pairs of RSNs, i.e. RSN 1 leads in phase
compared to RSN 2. nCC describes the amount of different interactions
(clusters) that occur between RSN pairs during the resting-state fMRI
scan, including the time-series being in-phase, out-of-phase, leading or
lagging. A total of 105 and 210 elements were extracted for nCC and
leadCoh, respectively (leadCoh matrix is not symmetrical).
2.6. Classification
2.6.1. Uni-modal
Classification was performed for the diagnostic and outcome case
and for each MRI feature set. For the diagnostic classifications, models
aimed to distinguish MDD participants from HCs. For the outcome,
participants were divided into two classes based on change in symptom
severity. This was done by calculation of the relative change in HDRS
score at the 6-months follow-up compared to baseline. If a participant
4
J. Pilmeyer et al. NeuroImage: Clinical 44 (2024) 103682
showed a reduction of ≥ 50 % in depression severity compared to
baseline, it was labeled as PO. Alternatively, the participant was labeled
as NO. This cutoff of relative change in HDRS has been accepted and
validated as the golden standard for evaluation of clinically significant
improvement (Bobo et al., 2016; Lacroix et al., 2021). Out of the 32
MDD patients, one decided to stop the study before the follow-up. The
31 other MDD patients completed the 6-months follow-up and were
divided into 12 PO (age 40.3 ± 14.4 years, 3/9 male/females) and 19
NO (age 46.8 ± 12.3 years, 8/11 male/females) participants, see
Table 1An SVM classifier with a linear kernel was implemented using leave- .
one-out nested cross-validation. The inner loop of the nested crossvalidation was used for feature selection on the n-1 subjects. The only
parameter that was optimized was the number of features. For each fold
in the outer loop, the optimal number of features (determined by the
highest AUC over all inner loop iterations) was used.
Because several feature sets had a high number of feature elements,
making the task compute-intensive and the comparison between the
feature sets biased, double feature ranking was applied (Drenthen et al.,
2021; Yang et al., 2021). Ranking was applied on the training set
whereas the left-out test sample remained untouched until performance
testing. First, the k initial most significant features elements were selected
based on group differences. This was performed with a two-sample t -test
or Wilcoxon rank sum test, depending on normality of the group dis­
tributions as assessed with the Shapiro-Wilk test (Mann and Whitney,
1947; Shapiro and Wilk, 1965). After initial selection, the k initial left-over
feature elements were added one-by-one, starting with the highest
ranked feature elements, adding the next one and iterating until a k final
maximum number of features. Two feature ranking methods were
applied:
1) Minimum redundancy maximum relevance (MRMR, (Ding and Peng,
2005)): higher feature ranking corresponds to features where mutual
information is maximized (maximum relevance) between a feature
and the response variable while reducing the mutual information
(minimum redundancy) between this feature and other features.
MRMR with a linear SVM classifier based on DTI and fMRI features
have been successfully (78 % and 86 % accuracy, respectively)
applied to objectively classify MDD before (Chu et al., 2018; Cîrstian
et al., 2023).
2) Concave minimization and support vector machines (CV-SVM,
(Mangasarian and Bradley, 1998)): Two bounding planes are calcu­
lated between the feature sets of the two classes. The separating
plane is then calculated by minimizing the sum of distances of
incorrectly classified points between the bounding plane. Further­
more, the dimensionality of features is reduced as much as possible
and additional SVM maximizes the distance between the two
bounding planes. CV-SVM feature selection in combination with a
linear SVM and resting-state fMRI features has been shown to
discriminate HCs from patients with schizophrenia with > 97 %
accuracy (Algumaei et al., 2022)
From the k final feature elements, the optimal number of features el­
ements, k optimal, was determined based on the highest validation AUC.
After k optimal was determined from the inner loop, the same initial se­
lection and final ranking procedures were applied to the training set of
the outer loop. The k optimal highest ranked features from the training set
of the outer loop were then applied to the unseen data from the test
subject to predict the test label. The whole procedure was repeated for
each outer loop fold. Performance was reported for the validation and
test sets: AUC, accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, f1-score and precision.
Different combinations of cutoff values for the maximum number of
features were tested for the initial group difference based selection and
second round of feature selection. Ranges were the following: k initial ∈
{5, 10, 20, 50, 100, All} and k final ∈ {3, 5, 10, 20}. Only range combi­
nations that were possible were run (e.g. k initial = 10 and k final = 20 is not
possible). We report here the findings of the combination k initial = 10 and
k final = 5 since these provided the highest overall AUC.
To test significance of each model, i.e. determine whether the model
performed significantly above chance level (AUC = 0.50), permutation
tests were conducted (Bhaumik et al., 2017). Through permutation of
the class labels while maintaining the data, a null distribution was
created. The AUC of each model was then compared with the obtained
null distribution. The whole classification set-up was maintained (nested
cross-validation with double feature selection) and the labels were
permutated 1000 times (Bhaumik et al., 2017). The p-value was ob­
tained by counting the number of times the permutation AUC exceeded
the AUC true label test and dividing it by 1000. A p-value ≤ 0.05 was
considered as significant.
Furthermore, to assess the uncertainty of the AUC values, 95 %
confidence intervals were calculated. For each reported AUC value,
bootstrapping was performed. The subjects’ data were randomly
resampled 1000 times with replacement, i.e. subjects could be selected
multiple times in a single bootstrap sample. Each bootstrap sample
contains the same number of subjects as in the original sample (i.e. n =
63 for diagnosis and n = 31 for prognosis). From each of the 1000
bootstrap samples, the AUC was calculated over the new set of predicted
labels. Finally, the 95 % confidence interval was calculated over the
1000 AUC values, obtained from the 1000 bootstrap samples. Confi­
dence intervals (CI) are reported as [CI min, CI max ].
2.7. Multi-modal
To assess the effect of combination of modalities, three different
methods were tested:
1) Concatenation: All feature sets were concatenated to one feature
vector and the same procedure as for the uni-modal classification
was applied.
2) Forced fusion: From each feature set, the top 5 feature elements were
selected by initial selection based on group differences in the training
sets of each inner fold (similar to the method to determine k initial, as
described in the uni-modal section). This ensures that feature ele­
ments from all feature sets were selected in the initial multi-modal
feature set. Subsequently, MRMR or CV-SVM feature ranking was
applied where k optimal was obtained in the same way as in the unimodal approach with k final = 5.
3) Ensemble classifier: The predicted labels from the SVM classifiers in
the uni-modal approach were subjected to majority voting in order to
obtain an ensemble prediction. Several ensemble classifiers were
created, including all 11 feature sets and all compossible combina­
$tions with n set \in \{3, 5, 7, 9\}.$
2.8. Feature analysis
To assess which feature elements had the most impact on prediction
of MDD and its outcome, the percentage that a feature element was
present in the outer folds was calculated. We perform these feature
contribution analyses on each optimal uni-modal model.
For analysis of the impact of features on the performance using the
most optimal (highest AUC) multi-modal model, an ablation experiment
was conducted. In each iteration, a feature set was removed from the
multi-modal model to assess the reduction in AUC. Features that result
in a higher reduction of AUC are associated with a higher impact on the
multi-modal model.
Furthermore, an explorative group difference analysis was per­
formed on all feature elements. For each feature set, group differences
between MDD and HC groups or between PO and NO groups were
calculated based on either the two-sample t -test or Wilcoxon rank sum
test, depending on normality of the group distributions as assessed with
the Shapiro-Wilk test. For each feature set, p-values were corrected for
multiple comparisons using the false discovery rate (FDR) with α = 0.05
5
J. Pilmeyer et al. NeuroImage: Clinical 44 (2024) 103682
(Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995).
**3. Results**
3.1. Classification
3.1.1. Uni-modal
AUC performance for the most optimal SVM models of each feature
set and the diagnostic and classifications can be found in Fig. 2 and all
other metrics in Supplementary Table S2. The corresponding validation
performance of these optimal models can be found in Supplementary
Table S3. For diagnosis, the AUC was the highest for the MD feature set
(0.701 [0.699, 0.706], p < 0.01) with a sensitivity of 71.9 % and
specificity of 67.7 %. For outcome, the sSW yielded the highest AUC
(0.860 [0.858, 0.866], p < 0.001). Performance metrics were relatively
imbalanced with a sensitivity of 91.7 % and specificity of 68.4 %. The
nCC yielded the highest AUC overall (p < 0.05 and p < 0.01 for diag­
nosis and outcome prediction, respectively).
3.1.2. Multi-modal
While multi-modal concatenation of the feature vectors and forced
fusion of the top 5 feature elements from each feature set did not result
in improvement, ensemble models based on 5 feature sets achieved
improved AUC for both diagnosis and outcome prediction compared to
uni-modal models, see Fig. 3 and Supplementary Table S4. For diag­
nosis, an AUC of 0.746 [0.741, 0.747] (sensitivity 78.1 % and specificity
71 %) was achieved with an ensemble model based on T 1, sFC, nCC, MD
and FA features. For outcome prediction, an ensemble model based on
leadCoh, sSW, MD, FA and AD yielded an AUC of 0.932 [0.927, 0.934]
(sensitivity 91.7 % and specificity 94.7 %). Moreover, several other
multi-echo ensembles resulted in improved performance compared to a
uni-modal approach, see Supplementary Table S5. A total of 11 and 17
ensemble models (of 3, 5 or 7 features) improved the top uni-modal for
diagnosis and outcome, respectively. Of these 28, only 1 ensemble
model consisted of a feature set combinations with measures from a
single modality. Of all ensemble models that improved AUC compared to
a uni-modal approach, 7.1 % consisted of feature sets with 2 modalities,
46.4 % with 3 modalities, 39.3 % with 4 modalities and lastly there was
one ensemble model that contained features from all 5 modalities ac­
quired in this study.
3.2. Feature analysis
3.2.1. Uni-modal feature contribution
The 3 highest feature element contributions for the top 3 uni-modal
feature models in diagnosis and outcome prediction are shown in Fig. 4.
For an overview of all features, see Supplementary Table S6 and S7.
For diagnosis, the highest contribution in the outer folds for each of
the top 3 feature sets: increased mean diffusivity between the right
supramarginal gyrus and right posterior cingulate gyrus (66.7 %),
decreased cortical thickness of the inferior parietal gyrus (77.8 %) and
increased nCC between the right frontoparietal network and the salience
network (98.4 %). Another interesting trend can be observed in the T 1
and nCC feature sets. The top 3 feature elements of T 1 set all display
decreased right hemisphere cortical thickness in MDD and the nCC
network pairs are all increased.
For outcome prediction, the feature elements with the highest outer
fold contribution for the top 3 feature sets comprise: increased sSW
between the right insula – right parahippocampal gyrus and the right
−
pars orbitalis left banks of superior temporal sulcus and between (both
62.5 %), increased nCC between the default mode network and the
sensorimotor network (34.4 %) and increased AD between the left
parahippocampal gyrus and the left lateral orbitofrontal gyrus (78.1 %)
in the NO group compared to the PO group. Interesting observations
include an increase in sSW in the top 3 feature elements for the NO group
and high contributions from the parahippocampal gyri (top feature
element in sSW and AD).
As the feature contribution is more related to feature occurrence, we
also calculated the feature impact on the models by assessment of the
β-coefficients that form the hyperplane of the linear SVMs. The higher a
β-coefficient, the more effect on the hyperplane and thus classification
outcome. Again we calculated the top 3 elements for each feature, see
Supplementary Table S8 and S9. In general, the top elements for feature
impact were relatively similar to feature contribution. However, it can
be observed that the most impactful feature for outcome prediction
based on sSW is the connection between the right insula and left superior
temporal gyrus. This finding, together with the feature contribution,
indicates the importance of the connections with the insula. For diag­
nosis, there were no significant changes in the top feature elements.
**Fig. 2. Uni-modal classification performance** The area under the curve (AUC) metric is calculated for each uni-modal feature set. This is shown for classification
between subjects with major depressive disorder versus healthy controls (diagnosis; light blue) and for positive versus negative outcome at 6-months follow-up
(outcome prediction; dark blue). For diagnosis, the highest AUC was 0.70 based on the mean diffusion (MD) feature set. For outcome prediction, the most
optimal model resulted in an AUC of 0.86 based on the sum of streamline weights (sSW) feature set. Abbreviations: sFC = static functional connectivity; nCC =
number of coherence clusters; Act = activity; FA = fractional anisotropy; AD = axial diffusivity; RD = radial diffusivity.
6
J. Pilmeyer et al. NeuroImage: Clinical 44 (2024) 103682
**Fig. 3. Multi-modal classification performance** The area under the curve (AUC) metric is calculated for each multi-modal feature set. This is shown for classi­
fication between subjects with major depressive disorder versus healthy controls (diagnosis; light blue) and for positive versus negative outcome (outcome pre­
diction; dark blue). For diagnosis, a multi-modal ensemble of 5 feature sets (T 1 -weighted, sFC, nCC, MD and FA) improved the AUC to 0.746 (highest uni-modal AUC
= 0.701). For outcome predictiion, a multi-modal ensemble of 5 feature sets (leadCoh, sSW, MD, FA and AD) increased the AUC to 0.932 (highest uni-modal AUC =
0.860). Abbreviations: sFC = static functional connectivity; nCC = number of coherence clusters; MD = mean diffusivity; FA = fractional anisotropy; leadCoh = lead
coherence; sSW = sum of streamline weights; AD = axial diffusivity.
3.3. Multi-modal feature contribution
The results of the ablation experiment to assess the contribution of
each uni-modal feature set in the top multi-modal ensemble model for
diagnosis and outcome prediction can be found in Fig. 5.
In both diagnosis and prognosis, FA impacted the performance of the
most optimal multi-modal ensemble model the most. Removal of the FA
feature set in the ensemble resulted in an AUC loss of 0.113 (from 0.746)
and 0.237 (from 0.932) for diagnosis and outcome prediction, respec­
tively. For both ensemble models, two DTI measures and one fMRI
wavelet measure were among the top 3 feature set contributions.
To further visualize the affected areas in the brain, the outer fold
contributions of each of the five feature sets from both ensemble models
were normalized and plotted in the brain, see Fig. 6. Generally, it can be
observed that the highest contributing regions were found in frontal and
limbic areas whereas networks were mostly located in frontoparietal
areas. While the most optimal ensemble classifier of diagnosis and
outcome prediction both comprise the FA and MD, the brain areas that
distinguish between the groups were different. For example, the model
with the highest AUC for FA in diagnosis classification was mostly based
on frontolimbic areas (rostral middle frontal gyrus, rostral anterior
cingulate gyrus, pallidum and frontal pole) whereas the areas supporting
the top FA models in outcome prediction were more widespread (su­
perior temporal gyrus, accumbens area and paracentral gyrus). For
diagnosis, highly contributing areas in the MD models were more
widespread (posterior cingulate gyrus, supramarginal gyrus and pre­
central gyrus) whereas those for outcome prediction were located
mostly in the parietal and limbic lobe (superior parietal gyrus, rostral
anterior cingulate gyrus and parahippocampal gyrus).
3.4. Group difference analysis
While 745 feature elements were significant when uncorrected in
MDD versus HC participants, 0 remained significant after FDR correc­
tion. Of the 1222 significant feature elements between the NO and PO
group, only 2 remained significant. The activity contrast (t-value) in the
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) between face and rest conditions was
$higher in the NO group (NO: - 2.02 \textbullet 10 -1  \pm 7.36 \textbullet 10 -1 ; PO: - 1.30 \textbullet 10 0$
$\pm 1.20 \textbullet 10 0 ) and in the subgenual ACC (NO: - 1.38 \textbullet 10 -1  \pm 9.88 \textbullet 10 -1 ;$
PO: − 1.28 • 10 0  ± 9.93 • 10 -1 ). The top 10 most significant (lowest pvalue) feature elements for diagnosis and outcome groups can be found
in Supplementary Table S10.
**4. Discussion**
In this paper we sought to diagnose MDD and predict MDD outcome
objectively using different MRI modalities. Additionally, we aimed to
evaluate the potential benefits of combining multiple modalities to
improve classification performance. Through a uni-modal approach,
MDD subjects were distinguished from HCs with an AUC of 0.701 based
on MD, whereas 6-months outcome groups were separated with an AUC
of 0.860 based on sSW. A multi-modal ensemble classifier of 5 features,
derived from T 1, resting-state fMRI and DTI scans, both improved
objective diagnosis (AUC 0.746) and outcome prediction (AUC 0.932).
7
J. Pilmeyer et al. NeuroImage: Clinical 44 (2024) 103682
**Fig. 4. Highest feature contributions** Feature contribution is calculated by occurence in the test models of the outer folds (percentage) for the top 3 feature sets and
elements. Colors indicate increases and decreases between groups. The symbols *, **, and *** indicate uncorrected p-values ≤ 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001, respectively.
Abbreviations: MDD = major depressive disorder; HC = healthy controls; NO/PO = negative/positive outcome; AUC = area under the curve; MD = mean diffusivity;
nCC = number of coherence clusters; sSW = sum of streamline weights; AD = axial diffusivity; r = right; l = left; lat = lateral; SMG = supramarginal gyrus; PCG =
posterior cingulate gyrus; AC = accumbens area; PrCG = precentral gyrus; RACG = rostral anterior cingulate gyrus; IPG = inferior parietal gyrus; POP = pars
opercularis; ICG = isthmus cingulate gyrus; FPN = frontoparietal network; SN = salience network; VN = visual network; SMN = sensorimotor network; IN = insula;
PHIG = parahippocampal gyrus; POR = pars orbitalis; BSTS = bank of superior temporal sulcus; DAN = dorsal attention network; DMN = default mode network; CN
= cerebellum network; LOFG = lateral orbitofrontal gyrus; CMFG = causal middle frontal gyrus.
4.1. Uni- versus multi-modal
**Fig. 5. Ablation experiment results** The ablation experiment demonstrates
the impact of each feature set on the performance of the optimal multi-modal
ensemble models. For each feature set, impact is measured as loss in area
under the curve (AUC) after removal from the ensemble model. Abbreviations:
FA = fractional anisotropy; MD = mean diffusivity; nCC = number of coherence
clusters; sFC = static functional connectivity; leadCoh = lead coherence; sSW =
sum of streamline weights; AD = axial diffusivity.
Generally, feature analysis revealed that predominantly frontolimbic
regions and frontoparietal networks were most contributing to the
diagnosis and outcome prediction. However, the brain location of the
most valuable features were found to be dependent on the feature and
the model (diagnosis versus outcome prediction), highlighting the fact
that MDD diagnostic biomarkers may be different than biomarkers
predicting outcome. These findings confirm our hypotheses that multimodal imaging improves classification performance in MDD and MDD
outcome.
For the uni-modal approach, several trends were noticeable. First,
the highest AUC was obtained by two DTI measures: MD for diagnosis
(AUC 0.701) and sSW for outcome prediction (AUC 0.860). These results
show the promise of the relatively novel DTI acquisition (multiband, 96
directions and 3 shells) and processing (CSD, ACT and SIFT2) which
allow DTI measures to be assessed along inter-regional WM tracts while
correcting for bias in fiber-tracking algorithms, providing a more bio­
logically accurate measure of structural connectivity. Second, overall
diagnostic performance was lower but more balanced (sensitivity versus
specificity) overall compared to outcome prediction performance. Third,
the number of optimal feature elements was relatively stable, with a
mean around 2.5 to 3.0. The stability of k optimal may be the result of the
implementation of a nested cross-validation, allowing to tune the
optimal number of feature elements independently of the left-out test
sample. By separating model selection and evaluation in an inner and
outer loop, nested LOOCV assesses the generalization performance. This
is crucial for model performance on unseen data, e.g. from follow-up
studies using different datasets and patients.
Multi-modal ensemble models improved both diagnosis (highest
AUC 0.746) and outcome prediction performance (highest AUC 0.932).
In total, 11 diagnostic and 17 outcome ensemble models (with 3, 5 or 7
feature sets) improved the AUC of the highest uni-modal approach. Of
note is the high balance between sensitivity and specificity for both
diagnostic and outcome prediction models. For diagnosis, sensitivity
and specificity ranged between 62.5–78.9 and between 67.7–80.6,
respectively. For outcome, this ranged between 75.0–100 and 84.2–100.
This is in agreement with other MRI studies that implemented ensembles
of linear SVM classifiers (Pei et al., 2020; Varol et al., 2012).
4.2. Diagnosis versus outcome prediction
Different features were found to be most important for diagnostic
versus outcome prediction. For diagnosis, nCC, sFC and T 1 were part of
the most optimal ensemble models whereas leadCoh, sSW and AD were
most contributing to the outcome prediction models. Furthermore,
8
J. Pilmeyer et al. NeuroImage: Clinical 44 (2024) 103682
**Fig. 6. Brain areas of key predictors** The brain visualizations represent areas that resulted in the highest multi-modal ensemble performance for diagnosis and
outcome prediction. The five feature sets comprising each optimal ensemble model are displayed. Colors indicate normalized outer fold contributions. Normalization
was performed by taking the minimum and maximum outer fold contributions over all models to allow comparison between the models. The gray brain background
indicates that these regions or networks were not part of the feature set of that model. Abbreviations: R = right; L = left; FA = fractional anisotropy; MD = mean
diffusivity; nCC = number of coherence clusters; sFC = static functional connectivity; leadCoh = lead coherence; sSW = sum of streamline weights; AD = axial
diffusivity.
where a general consensus was found that the highest discriminating
areas between MDD and HCs and the two MDD outcome groups were
located in frontal, parietal and limbic areas of the brain, the specific
regions or networks were different between the two pairs of classes.
Even in the case of FA and MD, which were found in both ensemble
models, the most important regions were located in different parts of the
brain for diagnosis versus outcome prediction: the model with the
highest AUC for FA in MDD classification was mostly based on fronto­
limbic areas (rostral middle frontal gyrus, rostral anterior cingulate
gyrus, pallidum and frontal pole) whereas the areas supporting the top
FA models in outcome prediction were more widespread (superior
temporal gyrus, accumbens area and paracentral gyrus). Regarding MD,
high diagnostic model contributions were found in more widespread
areas (posterior cingulate gyrus, supramarginal gyrus and precentral
gyrus) whereas those in outcome prediction were located mostly in the
limbic and parietal lobe (superior parietal gyrus, rostral anterior
cingulate gyrus and parahippocampal gyrus).
Thus, while FA and MD may both be valuable for MDD classification
and prediction of MDD outcome, the affected brain location and direc­
tion of change differ. This may be crucial for future prognostic
biomarker studies which aim to define ROIs a-priori or hypotheses based
on findings of previous studies reporting changes in MDD versus HCs (or
vice versa). These predefined ROIs or hypotheses may not translate to
similar findings between outcome groups.
4.3. Clinical interpretation
In general, the most important structural features were found to be
located in frontolimbic regions. MDD-related frontolimbic alterations in
brain structure and function have been reported before (Arnold et al.,
2012; Lai, 2021; LeWinn et al., 2014). This circuitry is associated with
emotion regulation (Kebets et al., 2021). Moreover, we found mostly
features based on functional networks to be located in frontoparietal
areas. Alterations in these brain regions have been associated with
cognitive dysfunction, and rumination (Lai, 2019).
More specifically, as reflected by the ablation study, FA was the most
important feature for diagnostic and prognostic multi-modal models.
For diagnosis, the connections in frontolimbic areas (rostral middle
frontal gyrus, rostral anterior cingulate gyrus, pallidum and frontal pole)
yielded the highest feature importance. For outcome prediction, these
were more widespread (superior temporal gyrus, accumbens area and
paracentral gyrus). A previous meta -analysis on DTI in MDD versus HCs
found decreases in FA of the corona radiata (van Velzen et al., 2019),
large bundles of fibers connecting with the ACC and frontal regions
(Jiang et al., 2019). These findings match with our results where FA in
tracts of the ACC and several frontal regions were decreased. The frontal
part of the corona radiata is part of the limbic-thalamo-cortical circuit
and reduced WM integrity thereof may affect cognitive and emotional
regulation (Sanjuan et al., 2013). Another finding that agrees on existing
literature regards the increase in FA in in the NO group between the
tracts connecting the accumbens area – posterior cingulate cortex (PCC).
The accumbens area, part of the ventral striatum, is a target area for
deep brain stimulation in MDD (Figee et al., 2022). This circuitry
overlaps with the reward-circuitry and therefore has been linked to
anhedonia, a common symptom in MDD. Moreover, hyperconnectivity
between the ventral striatum and the posterior DMN (including the PCC)
in MDD subjects has been shown to normalize following electrocon­
vulsive therapy (Leaver et al., 2016). Perhaps the NO group in our study,
with higher FA in this tract and not responding to psychotherapy and/or
pharmacotherapy, may therefore better respond to more invasive
treatments.
For single-modal models, MD and sSW yielded the highest perfor­
mance for diagnosis and outcome prediction, respectively. For diag­
nosis, these were located in, amongst others, the posterior cingulate
gyrus, supramarginal gyrus and precentral gyrus. While we did not find
previous reports of decreased MD surrounding the PCC, it is known to be
9
J. Pilmeyer et al. NeuroImage: Clinical 44 (2024) 103682
the key hub of the DMN (Fransson and Marrelec, 2008). Altered func­
tional connectivity of the DMN has frequently been reported in studies,
but the direction of change has been disputed (Pilmeyer et al., 2022).
This finding of decreased MD of tracts connecting with the PCC in MDD
patients may reflect increased structural connectivity. Enhanced acti­
vation of and connectivity with of the PCC hub has been associated with
rumination in MDD (Hamilton et al., 2015; Zhou et al., 2020). For
outcome prediction, sSW model contributions and β-coefficient analyses
revealed the importance of white matter tracts connecting the insulae
and parahippocampal gyrus. Together with the medial prefrontal cortex,
these two regions form the paralimbic system, which is linked to
emotional regulation, self-projection and memory (Jang et al., 2018).
Moreover, decreases in functional connectivity between the insula and
parahippocampal gyri have been associated before with negative
emotion (Jang et al., 2018). Our finding of decreased white matter
density (reflected by sSW) in connections to and from these regions may
reflect similar abnormalities in MDD.
4.4. Study limitations and strengths
The current study has several limitations. First, outcome was defined
binary and defined on change in severity estimated at two time points.
Multi-class or continuous depression severity change prediction with
regression models may ultimately be more useful in the clinic to select or
change treatment for MDD patients. The course of MDD may vary over
time: while some patients suffer from a one-time MDD episode, others
may show more fluctuating or chronic trajectories. Thus, from a clinical
viewpoint, future studies may add more practical value to models by
taking this information into account.
Second, the relative change in HDRS with a 50 % cutoff has been
validated as a measure of significant symptom improvement (Bobo et al.,
2016; Furukawa et al., 2007; Leucht et al., 2013). However, it is rarely
used as a sole instrument in clinical practice (Gautam et al., 2017; Ruh´e
et al., 2005). Other factors and measures, such as suicidality, malnu­
trition, comorbidities, safety, and costs often guide the treatment se­
lection and adjustments (Gautam et al., 2017).
Third, the dataset was relatively small. Models from the current
study may not generalize to other datasets and thus should still be tested
on a separate dataset. Moreover, we explored a rich multi-modal MRI
dataset derived in an observational longitudinal study setting, whereas
multi-site studies often are limited to uni-modal acquisition in a crosssectional design. Overfitting is also a greater risk with smaller datasets
and a high number of features. However, in this study, we limited this by
double and strict feature selection and nested LOOCV. Permutation tests
indicated that the obtained classification performance was not obtained
by chance since the true performance was significantly higher than the
null distribution of the performance of the permutated models.
The study’s naturalistic setting may be considered as a limitation and
strength. While this design does not determine the most effective
treatment for a patient, it offers insight into how a patient’s symptoms
may change given their current brain physiology. The strength is that a
naturalistic design may be more generalizable or potentially more
effective to real-world cases where patients have varied depression and
treatment history. Moreover, there is only scarce evidence from natu­
ralistic studies. We are only aware of one other treatment-as-usual MRI
study in MDD (Schmaal et al., 2015). In this study, patients with a
chronic trajectory could be discriminated from remitted patients with
73 % accuracy based on task-based fMRI features. After all, results from
both types of studies may be required to identify robust predictive
biomarkers in order to be used in the clinic.
This study also has several strengths. First, we performed classifi­
cation to distinguish MDD patients from HCs and NO from PO groups
using the same dataset. Because of this we were able to demonstrate that
biomarkers may differ depending on the classification goal. Factors such
as differences in selection criteria, acquisition parameters, image pro­
cessing and analysis methods cannot explain the observed different
features between diagnostic and outcome prediction models. Another
advantage is the application of several novel MRI acquisition, processing
and analysis methods. For example, multi-echo imaging in the fMRI
scans has been shown to reduce signal loss and enhance the signal-tonoise ratio and quality of resting-state networks (Kundu et al., 2017;
Pilmeyer et al., 2023). Multiband imaging reduces the scanning time
which could be traded for improved spatial or temporal resolution in
fMRI and DTI scans or to obtain more diffusion directions and shells.
High-resolution (0.39 × 0.39 × 2.0 mm) T 2 -weighted scans were
furthermore acquired which, in combination with T 1 -weighted scans
allowed hippocampal subfield and amygdalae nuclei segmentation
based on the novel Freesurfer tool. In addition, DTI measures were ob­
tained along WM tracts instead of per voxel using the high angular
multi-shell acquisition in combination with DCS and ACT. This allevi­
ates the problem of crossing fibers and ensures DTI tracts are only
accepted in more biologically plausible locations of the brain, reducing
the amount of false positives. Besides that, we maintained relatively
strict selection criteria, ruling out biases in results that may be explained
by confounders such as comorbidities and invasive treatments that are
known to have a significant impact on the brain. The downside of this
choice is that it reduces generalizability. Since MDD is highly hetero­
geneous, and the treatments options are various, we set several
boundaries to focus on a representative group of MDD patients
(receiving no electrical stimulation treatment) without comorbidities to
focus on the pathology of MDD itself.
**5. Conclusions**
In this work we aimed to identify MRI-based diagnostic and outcome
biomarkers of MDD. We showed that DTI features were the most
promising for diagnostic and prognostic models through a uni-modal
approach. Multi-modal ensemble models with features derived from
T 1 -weighted, resting-state fMRI and DTI scans improved the classifica­
tion performance. These comprised relatively novel features, including
functional network neurodynamics and more biologically accurate
measures of structural connectivity. Crucially, we demonstrated that the
brain areas of the most valuable features were different between diag­
nosis and outcome prediction. In general, the most valuable predictors
were located in frontal, limbic and parietal regions. The current findings
demonstrate the promise of multi-modal MRI for biomarker identifica­
tion in MDD diagnosis and outcome prediction. Future work may focus
on replication of the current classification pipeline with a larger and
more heterogeneous dataset or on further exploration of more sophis­
ticated approaches to define outcome.
**Funding sources**
This work was supported by funding from the Top Consortia for
Knowledge and Innovation Public-Private Partnerships (TKI-PPP, sub­
sidy identification number TK11812P07) and additional funding from
Philips.
**CRediT authorship contribution statement**
**Jesper Pilmeyer:** Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft, Visualization, Validation, Software, Methodology, Investigation,
Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. **Rolf Lamerichs:**
Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Software, Resources, Method­
ology, Data curation, Conceptualization. **Sjir Schielen:** Writing – review
& editing, Methodology, Conceptualization. **Faroeq Ramsaransing:**
Writing – review & editing, Methodology, Investigation. **Vivianne van**
**Kranen-Mastenbroek:** . **Jacobus F.A. Jansen:** Writing – review &
editing, Validation, Supervision, Methodology, Conceptualization.
**Marcel Breeuwer:** Writing – review & editing, Validation, Supervision,
Methodology, Conceptualization. **Svitlana Zinger:** Writing – review &
editing, Supervision, Project administration, Methodology,
10
J. Pilmeyer et al. NeuroImage: Clinical 44 (2024) 103682
Conceptualization.
**Declaration of Competing Interest**
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
**Data availability**
The authors do not have permission to share data.
**Acknowledgments**
This research was supported by Top Consortia for Knowledge and
Innovation Public-Private Partnerships (TK11812P07) and Philips. We
would like to thank Indy de Weert, Julia van Rijsingen, Britt Remmers
and Kaila de Boer for their significant contribution in the collection of
the dataset. They conducted the participant recruitment, selection, and
assessments, including the questionnaires and other examinations. We
also would like to thank Willem Huijbers for his contribution regarding
the ethical study approval and the development and optimization of the
multi-modal MRI protocol.
**Appendix A. Supplementary data**
[Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl.2024.103682)
(https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl.2024.103682)
**References**
Abe, O., Yamasue, H., Kasai, K., Yamada, H., Aoki, S., Inoue, H., Takei, K., Suga, M.,
Matsuo, K., Kato, T., Masutani, Y., Ohtomo, K., 2010. Voxel-based analyses of gray/
white matter volume and diffusion tensor data in major depression. Psychiatry Res
[181, 64–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pscychresns.2009.07.007.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pscychresns.2009.07.007)
Abi-Dargham, A., Horga, G., 2016. The search for imaging biomarkers in psychiatric
(https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.4190)
[Algumaei, A.H., Algunaid, R.F., Rushdi, M.A., Yassine, I.A., 2022. Feature and decision-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2213-1582(24)00123-2/h0015)
[level fusion for schizophrenia detection based on resting-state fMRI data. PLoS One](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2213-1582(24)00123-2/h0015)
[17, e0265300.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2213-1582(24)00123-2/h0015)
Arnold, J.F., Zwiers, M.P., Fitzgerald, D.A., van Eijndhoven, P., Becker, E.S., Rinck, M.,
Fernandez, G., Speckens, A.E.M., Tendolkar, I., 2012. Fronto-limbic microstructure
and structural connectivity in remission from major depression. Psychiatry Res 204,
[40–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pscychresns.2012.07.010.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pscychresns.2012.07.010)
American Psychiatric Association, 2013. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM-5®). American Psychiatric Pub.
Atkinson, L., Sankar, A., Adams, T.M., Fu, C.H.Y., 2014. Recent Advances in
Neuroimaging of Mood Disorders: Structural and Functional Neural Correlates of
Depression, Changes with Therapy, and Potential for Clinical Biomarkers. Curr Treat
[Options Psych 1, 278–293. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40501-014-0022-5.](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40501-014-0022-5)
[Benjamini, Y., Hochberg, Y., 1995. Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A Practical and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2213-1582(24)00123-2/h0035)
[Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2213-1582(24)00123-2/h0035)
[Series B (methodological) 57, 289–300.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2213-1582(24)00123-2/h0035)
Bernas, A., Aldenkamp, A.P., Zinger, S., 2018. Wavelet coherence-based classifier: A
resting-state functional MRI study on neurodynamics in adolescents with high (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2017.11.017)
[Bharti, K., Graham, S.J., Benatar, M., Briemberg, H., Chenji, S., Duprorg/10.1016/j.cmpb.2017.11.017.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2017.11.017) ´e, N., Dionne, A.,
[Frayne, R., Genge, A., Korngut, L., Luk, C., Zinman, L., Kalra, S., Consortium](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2213-1582(24)00123-2/h0045)
[(CALSNIC), for the C.A.N., 2022. Functional alterations in large-scale resting-state](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2213-1582(24)00123-2/h0045)
[networks of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: A multi-site study across Canada and the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2213-1582(24)00123-2/h0045)
[United States. PLoS One 17, e0269154.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2213-1582(24)00123-2/h0045)
Bhaumik, R., Jenkins, L.M., Gowins, J.R., Jacobs, R.H., Barba, A., Bhaumik, D.K.,
Langenecker, S.A., 2017. Multivariate pattern analysis strategies in detection of
remitted major depressive disorder using resting state functional connectivity.
[Bobo, W.V., AnglerNeuroimage Clin 16, 390o, G.C., Jenkins, G., Hall-Flavin, D.K., Weinshilboum, R., Biernacka, J. ´](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl.2016.02.018) [–398. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl.2016.02.018.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl.2016.02.018)
M., 2016. Validation of the 17-item Hamilton Depression Rating Scale definition of
response for adults with major depressive disorder using equipercentile linking to
Clinical Global Impression scale ratings: analysis of Pharmacogenomic Research
Network Antidepressant Medication Pharmacogenomic Study (PGRN-AMPS) data.
[Hum Psychopharmacol 31, 185–192. https://doi.org/10.1002/hup.2526.](https://doi.org/10.1002/hup.2526)
Brown, S.S.G., Rutland, J.W., Verma, G., Feldman, R.E., Alper, J., Schneider, M.,
Delman, B.N., Murrough, J.M., Balchandani, P., 2019. Structural MRI at 7T reveals
amygdala nuclei and hippocampal subfield volumetric association with Major
[Depressive Disorder symptom severity. Sci Rep 9, 10166. https://doi.org/10.1038/](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-46687-7)
(https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-46687-7)
Chu, S.-H., Lenglet, C., Schreiner, M.W., Klimes-Dougan, B., Cullen, K., Parhi, K.K., 2018.
Anatomical Biomarkers for Adolescent Major Depressive Disorder from Diffusion
Weighted Imaging using SVM Classifier. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc 2018,
[2740–2743. https://doi.org/10.1109/EMBC.2018.8512852.](https://doi.org/10.1109/EMBC.2018.8512852)
Cîrstian, R., Pilmeyer, J., Bernas, A., Jansen, J.F.A., Breeuwer, M., Aldenkamp, A.P.,
Zinger, S., 2023. Objective biomarkers of depression: A study of Granger causality
[and wavelet coherence in resting-state fMRI. J. Neuroimaging 33, 404–414. https://](https://doi.org/10.1111/jon.13085)
(https://doi.org/10.1111/jon.13085)
Cole, J., Costafreda, S.G., McGuffin, P., Fu, C.H.Y., 2011. Hippocampal atrophy in first
episode depression: a meta-analysis of magnetic resonance imaging studies. J Affect
[Disord 134, 483–487. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2011.05.057.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2011.05.057)
[Dai, L., Zhou, H., Xu, X., Zuo, Z., 2019. Brain structural and functional changes in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2213-1582(24)00123-2/h0080)
[Desikan, R.S., Spatients with major depressive disorder: a literature review. PeerJ 7, e8170´egonne, F., Fischl, B., Quinn, B.T., Dickerson, B.C., Blacker, D.,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2213-1582(24)00123-2/h0080) .
Buckner, R.L., Dale, A.M., Maguire, R.P., Hyman, B.T., Albert, M.S., Killiany, R.J.,
2006. An automated labeling system for subdividing the human cerebral cortex on
[MRI scans into gyral based regions of interest. Neuroimage 31, 968–980. https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.01.021)
(https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.01.021)
Dichter, G.S., Gibbs, D., Smoski, M.J., 2015. A systematic review of relations between
resting-state functional-MRI and treatment response in major depressive disorder.
[J. Affect. Disord. 172, 8–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2014.09.028.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2014.09.028)
Ding, C., Peng, H., 2005. Minimum redundancy feature selection from microarray gene
(https://doi.org/10.1142/s0219720005001004)
(https://doi.org/10.1142/s0219720005001004)
Drenthen, G.S., Jansen, J.F.A., Gommer, E., Gupta, L., Hofman, P.A.M., van KranenMastenbroek, V.H., Hilkman, D.M., Vlooswijk, M.C.G., Rouhl, R.P.W., Backes, W.H.,
2021. Predictive value of functional MRI and EEG in epilepsy diagnosis after a first
(https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yebeh.2020.107651)
(https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yebeh.2020.107651)
Figee, M., Riva-Posse, P., Choi, K.S., Bederson, L., Mayberg, H.S., Kopell, B.H., 2022.
[Deep Brain Stimulation for Depression. Neurotherapeutics 19, 1229–1245. https://](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13311-022-01270-3)
(https://doi.org/10.1007/s13311-022-01270-3)
Fischl, B., Salat, D.H., Busa, E., Albert, M., Dieterich, M., Haselgrove, C., van der
Kouwe, A., Killiany, R., Kennedy, D., Klaveness, S., Montillo, A., Makris, N.,
Rosen, B., Dale, A.M., 2002. Whole Brain Segmentation: Automated Labeling of
[Neuroanatomical Structures in the Human Brain. Neuron 33, 341–355. https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0896-6273(02)00569-X)
(https://doi.org/10.1016/S0896-6273(02)00569-X)
Fransson, P., Marrelec, G., 2008. The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a
pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation
(https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.05.059)
(https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.05.059)
Furukawa, T.A., Akechi, T., Azuma, H., Okuyama, T., Higuchi, T., 2007. Evidence-Based
Guidelines for Interpretation of the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression. J. Clin.
[Psychopharmacol. 27, 531. https://doi.org/10.1097/JCP.0b013e31814f30b1.](https://doi.org/10.1097/JCP.0b013e31814f30b1)
Gautam, S., Jain, A., Gautam, M., Vahia, V.N., Grover, S., 2017. Clinical Practice
Guidelines for the management of Depression. Indian J Psychiatry 59, S34–S50.
(https://doi.org/10.4103/0019-5545.196973)
Grieve, S.M., Korgaonkar, M.S., Gordon, E., Williams, L.M., Rush, A.J., 2016. Prediction
of nonremission to antidepressant therapy using diffusion tensor imaging. J Clin
[Psychiatry 77, e436–e443. https://doi.org/10.4088/JCP.14m09577.](https://doi.org/10.4088/JCP.14m09577)
Hacimusalar, Y., Es¸el, E., 2018. Suggested Biomarkers for Major Depressive Disorder.
[Noro Psikiyatr Ars 55, 280–290. https://doi.org/10.5152/npa.2017.19482.](https://doi.org/10.5152/npa.2017.19482)
Hamilton, M., 1960. A rating scale for depression. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 23,
[56–62. https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.23.1.56.](https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.23.1.56)
Hamilton, J.P., Siemer, M., Gotlib, I.H., 2008. Amygdala volume in major depressive
disorder: a meta-analysis of magnetic resonance imaging studies. Mol Psychiatry 13,
[993–1000. https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2008.57.](https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2008.57)
Hamilton, J.P., Farmer, M., Fogelman, P., Gotlib, I.H., 2015. Depressive Rumination, the
Default-Mode Network, and the Dark Matter of Clinical Neuroscience. Biol
[Psychiatry 78, 224–230. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.02.020.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.02.020)
Hariri, A.R., Tessitore, A., Mattay, V.S., Fera, F., Weinberger, D.R., 2002. The Amygdala
Response to Emotional Stimuli: A Comparison of Faces and Scenes. Neuroimage 17,
[317–323. https://doi.org/10.1006/nimg.2002.1179.](https://doi.org/10.1006/nimg.2002.1179)
Holtzheimer, P.E., Mayberg, H.S., 2011. Stuck in a rut: rethinking depression and its
(https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2010.10.004)
Iglesias, J.E., Augustinack, J.C., Nguyen, K., Player, C.M., Player, A., Wright, M., Roy, N.,
Frosch, M.P., McKee, A.C., Wald, L.L., Fischl, B., Van Leemput, K., 2015.
A computational atlas of the hippocampal formation using ex vivo, ultra-high
resolution MRI: Application to adaptive segmentation of in vivo MRI. Neuroimage
[115, 117–137. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.04.042.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.04.042)
Iglesias, J.E., Van Leemput, K., Augustinack, J., Insausti, R., Fischl, B., Reuter, M., 2016.
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, Bayesian longitudinal segmentation of
hippocampal substructures in brain MRI using subject-specific atlases. Neuroimage
[141, 542–555. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.07.020.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.07.020)
Jang, J.H., Kim, J.-H., Yun, J.-Y., Choi, S.-H., An, S.C., Kang, D.-H., 2018. Differences in
Functional Connectivity of the Insula Between Brain Wave Vibration in Meditators
(https://doi.org/10.1007/s12671-018-0928-x)
(https://doi.org/10.1007/s12671-018-0928-x)
Jenkinson, M., Beckmann, C.F., Behrens, T.E., Woolrich, M.W., Smith, S.M., 2012. FSL.
[Neuroimage 62, 782–790. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.09.015.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.09.015)
Jeurissen, B., Tournier, J.-D., Dhollander, T., Connelly, A., Sijbers, J., 2014. Multi-tissue
constrained spherical deconvolution for improved analysis of multi-shell diffusion
[MRI data. Neuroimage 103, 411–426. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.07.061)
(https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.07.061)
11
J. Pilmeyer et al. NeuroImage: Clinical 44 (2024) 103682
Jiang, C., Yi, L., Cai, S., Zhang, L., 2019. Ischemic Stroke in Pontine and Corona Radiata:
Location Specific Impairment of Neural Network Investigated With Resting State
(https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2019.00575)
Kang, S.G., Cho, S.E., 2020. Neuroimaging Biomarkers for Predicting Treatment
Response and Recurrence of Major Depressive Disorder. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21, 2148.
(https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21062148)
Kebets, V., Favre, P., Houenou, J., Polosan, M., Perroud, N., Aubry, J.-M., Van De
Ville, D., Piguet, C., 2021. Fronto-limbic neural variability as a transdiagnostic
(https://doi.org/10.1038/s41398-021-01666-3)
[10.1038/s41398-021-01666-3.](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41398-021-01666-3)
Korgaonkar, M.S., Williams, L.M., Song, Y.J., Usherwood, T., Grieve, S.M., 2014.
Diffusion tensor imaging predictors of treatment outcomes in major depressive
(https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.bp.113.140376)
(https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.bp.113.140376)
Kraus, C., Seiger, R., Pfabigan, D.M., Sladky, R., Tik, M., Paul, K., Woletz, M.,
Gryglewski, G., Vanicek, T., Komorowski, A., Kasper, S., Lamm, C.,
Windischberger, C., Lanzenberger, R., 2019. Hippocampal Subfields in Acute and
Remitted Depression-an Ultra-High Field Magnetic Resonance Imaging Study. Int J
[Neuropsychopharmacol 22, 513–522. https://doi.org/10.1093/ijnp/pyz030.](https://doi.org/10.1093/ijnp/pyz030)
Kundu, P., Voon, V., Balchandani, P., Lombardo, M.V., Poser, B.A., Bandettini, P.A.,
2017. Multi-echo fMRI: A review of applications in fMRI denoising and analysis of
BOLD signals. NeuroImage, Cleaning up the fMRI Time Series: Mitigating Noise with
[Advanced Acquisition and Correction Strategies 154, 59–80. https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.03.033)
[10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.03.033.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.03.033)
Lacroix, A., Calvet, B., Laplace, B., Lannaud, M., Plansont, B., Guignandon, S.,
Balestrat, P., Girard, M., 2021. Predictors of clinical response after rTMS treatment
of patients suffering from drug-resistant depression. Transl Psychiatry 11, 1–7.
(https://doi.org/10.1038/s41398-021-01555-9)
Lai, C.-H., 2019. Major depressive disorder in neuroimaging: What is beyond fronto (https://doi.org/10.2174/1573400515666181213155225)
[10.2174/1573400515666181213155225.](https://doi.org/10.2174/1573400515666181213155225)
Lai, C.-H., 2021. Fronto-limbic neuroimaging biomarkers for diagnosis and prediction of
treatment responses in major depressive disorder. Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol.
[Biol. Psychiatry 107, 110234. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2020.110234.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2020.110234)
Leaver, A.M., Espinoza, R., Joshi, S.H., Vasavada, M., Njau, S., Woods, R.P., Narr, K.L.,
2016. Desynchronization and Plasticity of Striato-frontal Connectivity in Major
[Depressive Disorder. Cereb Cortex 26, 4337–4346. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/](https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhv207)
(https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhv207)
Lener, M.S., Iosifescu, D.V., 2015. In pursuit of neuroimaging biomarkers to guide
treatment selection in major depressive disorder: a review of the literature. Ann. N.
[Y. Acad. Sci. 1344, 50–65. https://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.12759.](https://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.12759)
Leucht, S., Fennema, H., Engel, R., Kaspers–Janssen, M., Lepping, P., Szegedi, A., 2013.
[What does the HAMD mean? J. Affect. Disord. 148, 243–248. https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2012.12.001)
[10.1016/j.jad.2012.12.001.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2012.12.001)
LeWinn, K.Z., Connolly, C.G., Wu, J., Drahos, M., Hoeft, F., Ho, T.C., Simmons, A.N.,
Yang, T.T., 2014. White matter correlates of adolescent depression: structural
evidence for frontolimbic disconnectivity. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 53
[(899–909), 909.e1. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2014.04.021.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2014.04.021)
Li, T., Guo, Y., Zhao, Z., Chen, M., Lin, Q., Hu, X., Yao, Z., Hu, B., 2024. Automated
diagnosis of major depressive disorder with multi-modal MRIs based on contrastive
[learning: a few-shot study. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 1–1. https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSRE.2024.3380357)
(https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSRE.2024.3380357)
Ma, H., Zhang, D., Wang, Y., Ding, Y., Yang, J., Li, K., 2023. Prediction of early
improvement of major depressive disorder to antidepressant medication in
adolescents with radiomics analysis after ComBat harmonization based on multiscale
(https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-023-04966-8)
[04966-8.](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-023-04966-8)
[Malhi, G.S., Mann, J.J., 2018. Depression. Lancet 392, 2299–2312. https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31948-2)
[10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31948-2.](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31948-2)
Mangasarian, O.L., Bradley, P.S., 1998. Feature Selection Via Concave Minimization and
Support Vector Machines.
Mann, H.B., Whitney, D.R., 1947. On a Test of Whether one of Two Random Variables is
[Stochastically Larger than the Other. Ann. Math. Stat. 18, 50–60. https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/10.1214/aoms/1177730491)
[10.1214/aoms/1177730491.](https://doi.org/10.1214/aoms/1177730491)
[McKinnon, M.C., Yucel, K., Nazarov, A., MacQueen, G.M., 2009. A meta-analysis](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2213-1582(24)00123-2/h0280)
(http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2213-1582(24)00123-2/h0280)
(http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2213-1582(24)00123-2/h0280)
Mueller, S., Costa, A., Keeser, D., Pogarell, O., Berman, A., Coates, U., Reiser, M.F., Riedel, M., Moller, H., Ettinger, U., Meindl, T., 2014. The effects of methylphenidate ¨
on whole brain intrinsic functional connectivity. Hum Brain Mapp 35, 5379–5388.
(https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.22557)
Pei, C., Sun, Y., Zhu, J., Wang, X., Zhang, Y., Zhang, S., Yao, Z., Lu, Q., 2020. Ensemble
Learning for Early-Response Prediction of Antidepressant Treatment in Major
[Depressive Disorder. J. Magn. Reson. Imaging 52, 161–171. https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmri.27029)
[10.1002/jmri.27029.](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmri.27029)
Perlman, K., Benrimoh, D., Israel, S., Rollins, C., Brown, E., Tunteng, J.-F., You, R.,
You, E., Tanguay-Sela, M., Snook, E., Miresco, M., Berlim, M.T., 2019. A systematic
meta-review of predictors of antidepressant treatment outcome in major depressive
[disorder. J Affect Disord 243, 503–515. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2018.09.067.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2018.09.067)
Pilmeyer, J., Huijbers, W., Lamerichs, R., Jansen, J.F.A., Breeuwer, M., Zinger, S., 2022.
Functional MRI in major depressive disorder: A review of findings, limitations, and
(https://doi.org/10.1111/jon.13011)
Pilmeyer, J., Hadjigeorgiou, G., Lamerichs, R.M.J.N., Breeuwer, M., Aldenkamp, A.P.,
Zinger, S., 2023. Spatial and Temporal Quality of Brain Networks for Different Multi[Echo fMRI Combination Methods. IEEE Access 11, 114536–114549. https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3324183)
[10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3324183.](https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3324183)
Poirot, M.G., Ruhe, H.G., Mutsaerts, H.-J.-M.-M., Maximov, I.I., Groote, I.R.,
Bjørnerud, A., Marquering, H.A., Reneman, L., Caan, M.W.A., 2024. Treatment
Response Prediction in Major Depressive Disorder Using Multimodal MRI and
Clinical Data: Secondary Analysis of a Randomized Clinical Trial. AJP 181, 223–233.
(https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.20230206)
Posse, S., Wiese, S., Gembris, D., Mathiak, K., Kessler, C., Grosse-Ruyken, M.-L.,
Elghahwagi, B., Richards, T., Dager, S.R., Kiselev, V.G., 1999. Enhancement of
BOLD-contrast sensitivity by single-shot multi-echo functional MR imaging. Magn.
[Reson. Med. 42, 87–97. https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1522-2594(199907)42:](https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1522-2594(199907)42:1<87::AID-MRM13>3.0.CO;2-O)
1 < [87::AID-MRM13](https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1522-2594(199907)42:1<87::AID-MRM13>3.0.CO;2-O) > 3.0.CO;2-O.
Ruh´e, H.G., Dekker, J.J., Peen, J., Holman, R., de Jonghe, F., 2005. Clinical use of the
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale: is increased efficiency possible? A post hoc
comparison of Hamilton Depression Rating Scale, Maier and Bech subscales, Clinical
Global Impression, and Symptom Checklist-90 scores. Compr. Psychiatry 46,
[417–427. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comppsych.2005.03.001.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comppsych.2005.03.001)
Samuels, B.A., Leonardo, E.D., Hen, R., 2015. Hippocampal Subfields and Major
[Depressive Disorder. Biol Psychiatry 77, 210–211. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2014.11.007)
(https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2014.11.007)
Sanjuan, P.M., Thoma, R., Claus, E.D., Mays, N., Caprihan, A., 2013. Reduced white
matter integrity in the cingulum and anterior corona radiata in posttraumatic stress
disorder in male combat veterans: A diffusion tensor imaging study. Psychiatry Res
[214, 260–268. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pscychresns.2013.09.002.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pscychresns.2013.09.002)
Saygin, Z.M., Kliemann, D., Iglesias, J.E., van der Kouwe, A.J.W., Boyd, E., Reuter, M.,
Stevens, A., Van Leemput, K., McKee, A., Frosch, M.P., Fischl, B., Augustinack, J.C.,
2017. Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, High-resolution magnetic
resonance imaging reveals nuclei of the human amygdala: manual segmentation to
(https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.04.046)
[Schmaal, L., Marquand, A.F., Rhebergen, D., van Tol, M.-J., Ruhneuroimage.2017.04.046.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.04.046) ´e, H.G., van der Wee, N.
J.A., Veltman, D.J., Penninx, B.W.J.H., 2015. Predicting the Naturalistic Course of
Major Depressive Disorder Using Clinical and Multimodal Neuroimaging
Information: A Multivariate Pattern Recognition Study. Biological Psychiatry,
[Depression 78, 278–286. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2014.11.018.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2014.11.018)
Shapiro, S.S., Wilk, M.B., 1965. An Analysis of Variance Test for Normality (Complete
[Samples). Biometrika 52, 591–611. https://doi.org/10.2307/2333709.](https://doi.org/10.2307/2333709)
Shi, Q., Chen, H., Jia, Q., Yuan, Z., Wang, J., Li, Y., Han, Z., Mo, D., Zhang, Y., 2020.
Altered Granger Causal Connectivity of Resting-State Neural Networks in Patients
With Leukoaraiosis-Associated Cognitive Impairment—A Cross-Sectional Study.
Frontiers in Neurology 11.
Smith, R.E., Raffelt, D., Tournier, J.-D., Connelly, A., 2022. Quantitative streamlines
tractography: methods and inter-subject normalisation. Aperture Neuro 1–25.
10.52294/ApertureNeuro.2022.2.NEOD9565.
Smith, S.M., Fox, P.T., Miller, K.L., Glahn, D.C., Fox, P.M., Mackay, C.E., Filippini, N.,
Watkins, K.E., Toro, R., Laird, A.R., Beckmann, C.F., 2009. Correspondence of the
brain’s functional architecture during activation and rest. PNAS 106, 13040–13045.
(https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0905267106)
Smith, R.E., Tournier, J.-D., Calamante, F., Connelly, A., 2012. Anatomically-constrained
tractography: Improved diffusion MRI streamlines tractography through effective
(https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.06.005)
[10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.06.005.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.06.005)
Smith, R.E., Tournier, J.-D., Calamante, F., Connelly, A., 2015. SIFT2: Enabling dense
quantitative assessment of brain white matter connectivity using streamlines
(https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.06.092)
[Sorg, C., Manoliu, A., Neufang, S., Myers, N., Peters, H., Schwerthneuroimage.2015.06.092Mühlau, M., Zimmer, C., Drzezga, A., FWohlschl¨ager, A.M., Riedl, V., 2013. Increased Intrinsic Brain Activity in the .](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.06.092) orstl, H., B¨ ¨auml, J., Eichele, T., offer, D., Scherr, M., ¨
Striatum Reflects Symptom Dimensions in Schizophrenia. Schizophr. Bull. 39,
[387–395. https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbr184.](https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbr184)
Stuhrmann, A., Suslow, T., Dannlowski, U., 2011. Facial emotion processing in major
depression: a systematic review of neuroimaging findings. Biol Mood Anxiety Disord
[1, 10. https://doi.org/10.1186/2045-5380-1-10.](https://doi.org/10.1186/2045-5380-1-10)
Tournier, J.-D., Smith, R., Raffelt, D., Tabbara, R., Dhollander, T., Pietsch, M.,
Christiaens, D., Jeurissen, B., Yeh, C.-H., Connelly, A., 2019. MRtrix3: A fast, flexible
and open software framework for medical image processing and visualisation.
[Neuroimage 202, 116137. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.116137.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.116137)
van Velzen, L.S., Kelly, S., Isaev, D., Aleman, A., Aftanas, L.I., Bauer, J., Baune, B.T.,
Brak, I.V., Carballedo, A., Connolly, C.G., Couvy-Duchesne, B., Cullen, K.R.,
Danilenko, K.V., Dannlowski, U., Enneking, V., Filimonova, E., Forster, K., Frodl, T.,
Gotlib, I.H., Groenewold, N.A., Grotegerd, D., Harris, M.A., Hatton, S.N., Hawkins, E.
L., Hickie, I.B., Ho, T.C., Jansen, A., Kircher, T., Klimes-Dougan, B., Kochunov, P.,
Krug, A., Lagopoulos, J., Lee, R., Lett, T.A., Li, M., MacMaster, F.P., Martin, N.G.,
McIntosh, A.M., McLellan, Q., Meinert, S., Nenadic, I., Osipov, E., Penninx, B.W.J.H.,
Portella, M.J., Repple, J., Roos, A., Sacchet, M.D., Samann, P.G., Schnell, K.,
Shen, X., Sim, K., Stein, D.J., van Tol, M.-J., Tomyshev, A.S., Tozzi, L., Veer, I.M.,
Vermeiren, R., Vives-Gilabert, Y., Walter, H., Walter, M., van der Wee, N.J.A., van
der Werff, S.J.A., Schreiner, M.W., Whalley, H.C., Wright, M.J., Yang, T.T., Zhu, A.,
Veltman, D.J., Thompson, P.M., Jahanshad, N., Schmaal, L., 2019. White matter
disturbances in major depressive disorder: a coordinated analysis across 20
(https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-019-0477-2)
(https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-019-0477-2)
[van Vliet, I.M., de Beurs, E., 2007. The MINI-International Neuropsychiatric Interview. A](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2213-1582(24)00123-2/h0395)
[brief structured diagnostic psychiatric interview for DSM-IV en ICD-10 psychiatric](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2213-1582(24)00123-2/h0395)
(http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2213-1582(24)00123-2/h0395)
Varol, E., Gaonkar, B., Erus, G., Schultz, R., Davatzikos, C., 2012. Feature ranking based
nested support vector machine ensemble for medical image classification. In: IEEE
12
J. Pilmeyer et al. NeuroImage: Clinical 44 (2024) 103682
International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI). Presented at the 2012 9th
[IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI), pp. 146–149. https://](https://doi.org/10.1109/ISBI.2012.6235505)
(https://doi.org/10.1109/ISBI.2012.6235505)
Wang, X., Foryt, P., Ochs, R., Chung, J.-H., Wu, Y., Parrish, T., Ragin, A.B., 2011.
Abnormalities in Resting-State Functional Connectivity in Early Human
[Immunodeficiency Virus Infection. Brain Connect 1, 207–217. https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/10.1089/brain.2011.0016)
[10.1089/brain.2011.0016.](https://doi.org/10.1089/brain.2011.0016)
Yang, C., Wang, P., Tan, J., Liu, Q., Li, X., 2021. Autism spectrum disorder diagnosis
using graph attention network based on spatial-constrained sparse functional brain
(https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104963)
(https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104963)
Zhang, S., She, S., Qiu, Y., Li, Z., Wu, X., Hu, H., Zheng, W., Huang, R., Wu, H., 2023.
Multi-modal MRI measures reveal sensory abnormalities in major depressive
[disorder patients: A surface-based study. NeuroImage: Clinical 39, 103468. https://](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl.2023.103468)
(https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl.2023.103468)
Zhou, H.-X., Chen, X., Shen, Y.-Q., Li, L., Chen, N.-X., Zhu, Z.-C., Castellanos, F.X.,
Yan, C.-G., 2020. Rumination and the default mode network: Meta-analysis of brain
(https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.116287)
(https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.116287)
13
=== END: pilmeyer-2024.pdf (10 equations) ===
