=== PDF: s41398-024-03024-5.pdf ===

Translational Psychiatry www.nature.com/tp
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW **OPEN**
The diagnosis of ASD with MRI: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Sjir J. C. Schielen 1 ✉, Jesper Pilmeyer 1, Albert P. Aldenkamp 1,2 and Svitlana Zinger 1
© The Author(s) 2024
|Col1|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||While diagnosing autism spectrum disorder (ASD) based on an objective test is desired, the current diagnostic practice involves<br>observation-based criteria. This study is a systematic review and meta-analysis of studies that aim to diagnose ASD using magnetic<br>resonance imaging (MRI). The main objective is to describe the state of the art of diagnosing ASD using MRI in terms of<br>performance metrics and interpretation. Furthermore, subgroups, including different MRI modalities and statistical heterogeneity,<br>are analyzed. Studies that dichotomously diagnose individuals with ASD and healthy controls by analyses progressing from<br>magnetic resonance imaging obtained in a resting state were systematically selected by two independent reviewers. Studies were<br>sought on Web of Science and PubMed, which were last accessed on February 24, 2023. The included studies were assessed on<br>quality and risk of bias using the revised Quality Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies tool. A bivariate random-effects model<br>was used for syntheses. One hundred and thirty-four studies were included comprising 159 eligible experiments. Despite the<br>overlap in the studied samples, an estimated 4982 unique participants consisting of 2439 individuals with ASD and 2543 healthy<br>controls were included. The pooled summary estimates of diagnostic performance are 76.0% sensitivity (95% CI 74.1–77.8), 75.7%<br>speciﬁcity (95% CI 74.0–77.4), and an area under curve of 0.823, but uncertainty in the study assessments limits conﬁdence. The<br>main limitations are heterogeneity and uncertainty about the generalization of diagnostic performance. Therefore, comparisons<br>between subgroups were considered inappropriate. Despite the current limitations, methods progressing from MRI approach the<br>diagnostic performance needed for clinical practice. The state of the art has obstacles but shows potential for future clinical<br>||
$|<br>|<br>|| |<br>|<br>|| |<br>|<br>|| |<br>|<br>|| |<br>|<br>|| |<br>|<br>|| |<br>|<br>|| |<br>|<br>|| |<br>|<br>|| |<br>|<br>|| |<br>|<br>||$
||||
$|<br>|<br>|| |<br>|<br>|| |<br>|<br>||$
||application.||
||||
||||
||Translational Psychiatry  (2024) 14:318 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41398-024-03024-5||
||||
INTRODUCTION
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a spectrum of neuropsychiatric
disorders that typically comes paired with challenges in social
interaction. Children with ASD tend to show repetitive behavior in
activities and interests and deficits in communication and
reciprocal ability. Though most visible during childhood, the
effects of ASD persist for a lifetime 1.
The prevalence of ASD is estimated to be one in a hundred
people worldwide 2. As individuals with ASD lag behind their
healthy peers in development, they are at a higher risk of
comorbidities such as depression, stress, and anxiety 1, 3. This
burden not only affects the individual with ASD but is known to
spill over to the caregiver 3–6. Carrying this burden comes with
healthcare costs estimated to range from $2.4 million to $3.2
million (US$) over the lifetime of an individual 7.
After its first description in 1943, the definition of autism has
changed many times over the years 8, 9. Currently, the fifth
edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM-5) is the standard handbook for authoritative
guidance in the diagnosis of mental disorders, among which ASD,
in several countries, including the United States 1. The diagnostic
criteria in the DSM-5 have been debated, specifically during the
revision period leading up to its publication. A significant part of
the debate finds its root in the subjectivity surrounding the
observation-based diagnosis 9, 10. Observation-based diagnosis
has been agreed to be imperfect, which is why the National
Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) called for the paradigm to
change toward a diagnosis based on analyses progressing from
objective measurements [11, 12].
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) offers a noninvasive, highlevel measurement of the brain from which analysis can progress
toward clinically relevant variation used for diagnosis. Many studies
have explored the dichotomous classification between individuals
with ASD and healthy control subjects (HCs) using different
modalities of MRI scans: functional MRI (fMRI), structural MRI (sMRI),
and diffusion MRI (dMRI; i.e., diffusion tensor imaging) [13, 14]. A
partly similar review that focused only on resting-state fMRI
(rsfMRI) was conducted by Santana et al. (2022) 15. In their review,
they presented that the number of included studies exponentially
increased up until the year 2019. If this trend continues, each
subsequent year will contain more studies. Therefore, including the
3 succeeding years results in a significant increase in papers, which
motivates an update. We also aim to expand by incorporating
different MRI modalities. Furthermore, we wholly adhered to the
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and MetaAnalyses (PRISMA) 2020 guidelines 16.
1 Department of Electrical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, the Netherlands. 2 Department of Behavioral Sciences, Epilepsy Center Kempenhaeghe,
Heeze, the Netherlands. ✉ (mailto:s.j.c.schielen@tue.nl)
Received: 12 July 2023 Revised: 25 June 2024 Accepted: 15 July 2024
on the same dataset were reported, the results of the experiment
outlined by the authors were used. If the authors did not outline a
result, the experiment that yielded the best diagnostic accuracy
was selected.
Data items
The data items that were extracted from the studies span the
following domains: the dataset (sample size, demographics,
whether it is obtained at one or more sites), features (atlas, type
of features, type of processing, and dimension of feature vector),
the classifier (type and validation method), performance metrics
(sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy). The year of publication,
number of experiments, and imaging modality were also
collected. The performance metrics are the most important to
the review’s conclusions, as it is considered most in the statistical
syntheses. A full overview of the data extraction form is present in
the registry and in Supplementary Materials A2. The time frame
was not considered, as per the selection criteria only crosssectional experiments were eligible. If studies did not report the
sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy, additional information that
allows these to be calculated was sought in the paper. The
information needed to calculate the required performance metrics
is given in the registry and in Supplementary Materials A1.
Study assessment
The included studies’ risks of bias and quality were assessed on four
domains: patient selection, index test, reference standard, and flow
and timing, as we used the revised Quality Assessment of Diagnostic
Accuracy Studies (QUADAS-2) tool 17. The QUADAS-2 tool consists
of questions for each of the domains which help in an assessment of
the respective domain’s risk of bias and overall quality. Concerns
regarding applicability were also described for the domains of
patient selection, index test, and reference standard. The assessments were made by two reviewers (SJCS and JP) independently
and discrepancies were resolved by discussion. The QUADAS-2 tool
was tailored to this review by adding and deleting some questions
from the original template. The domain of the index test, for
example, was tailored to assess the risk of overfitting, as too many
included features tend to cause overfitting [18, 19]. The template
and amendments with motivation can be found in the registry and
in Supplementary Materials A3.
A judgment that summarized the studies’ risk of bias was made
per domain. The overall judgment was mainly based on the
majority of the answers: a majority of yeses, nos, or “unclears”,
respectively resulted in a low, high, or unclear risk of bias
assessment. If there was no majority, the overall assessment is
unclear.
One exception was made for studies where only data from a
single site were used to validate results based on a single train-test
split. We gave this a high risk of bias for the index test, as there is a
risk that the reported result was based on a lucky split which could
have been avoided by using cross-validation. If a study trained its
classifier on data obtained from one site and then tested it on data
obtained from another site, we considered this risk lower for the
following reasons. The split is transparent and testing on the data
of a different site introduces variation through different scanning
parameters, which has an adverse effect on the performance of
overfitted classifiers.
Meta-analysis
We used Reitsma’s bivariate random-effect model to analyze
aggregated diagnostic performance metrics 20. The reported
performance metrics and group sizes were used to calculate
confusion matrices required for the mada (Meta-Analysis of
Diagnostic Accuracy) package in R [21, 22]. Using this model, we
obtained the following statistical syntheses: the sensitivity,
specificity, summary receiver operator characteristics curve
(SROC), and the area under the SROC (AUC). These results were
Translational Psychiatry (2024) 14:318
2
S.J.C. Schielen et al.
In this study, we mainly aim to describe the state of the art of
diagnosing ASD using MRI in terms of aggregated diagnostic
performance metrics. We also aim to compare imaging modalities
and analyze statistical heterogeneity.
METHODS
Registration
This review was registered at Open Science Framework Registries
(https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/DRS3Q)
protocol, amendments, and explanations are provided in the
registry. The scripts central to the conclusions drawn in this review
are also provided in the registry.
Eligibility criteria
Two reviewers (SJCS and JP) independently screened and
selected peer-reviewed, cross-sectional studies that described
dichotomous, individual-level classification between individuals
with ASD and HCs through an analysis progressing from data
obtained from a resting-state MRI scan. We made the decision to
exclude task-based studies. While task-based fMRI merits
research in the field of neuropsychiatric disorders, we deem
the factor of analysis to be leading. It is an attempt to limit the
heterogeneity between the tasks subjects are instructed to
perform, which is more consistent for studies where participants
perform the resting task. Furthermore, the studies had to be
written in English and published between January 1, 2018, and
December 31, 2022. Studies had to report information on their
included participants (at least the number of individuals with
ASD and HCs) and how their sample was used for training,
validation, and testing, along with the resulting diagnostic
accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity. Conflicts concerning a
study’s eligibility were resolved by consensus. An overview of
the eligibility criteria is available in the registration protocol and
in Supplementary Materials A1.
The included studies were used for statistical syntheses in the
following divisions. Besides synthesizing results on all studies
combined, subgroups were made for syntheses in two ways: per
modality (dMRI, rsfMRI, sMRI, multimodal) and whether the data
was obtained from single or multiple imaging sites. In a post hoc
analysis to assess the performance of different features, studies
that used Pearson-correlation-based functional connectivity were
compared to studies that applied the Fisher transformation to the
correlation values, as Santana et al. found that the Fisher
transformation leads to significantly better sensitivity and
specificity 15.
Source and search
Web of Science and PubMed were used to conduct searches, of
which the last occurred on February 24, 2023, for both databases.
The following search term was used: (“Autism” OR “Asperger” OR
“autism spectrum disorder” OR “ASD”) AND (“classification” OR
$\textquotedblleftmachine learning\textquotedblright OR \textquotedblleftSVM\textquotedblright OR \textquotedblleftNN\textquotedblright OR \textquotedblleftprediction\textquotedblright OR \textquotedblleftdeep$
learning” OR “computer-aided diagnosis”) AND (“magnetic resonance
$imaging\textquotedblright OR \textquotedblleftMRI\textquotedblright), where the search range was set between$
January 1, 2018, and December 31, 2022. We used Web of
Science’s option to exclude reviews from the search results.
Selection and collection
A template was made of the relevant information (variables) to
extract from the studies. A consensus was reached on the
template before data collection. Afterward, the information
specified by the template was extracted from included reports
by two reviewers (SJCS and JP) independently. Discrepancies in
the extracted variables were resolved by discussion.
If a study reported multiple experiments, only the experiments
conducted on different datasets were included to avoid a
disproportionate weight in the analyses. If various experiments
3
obtained for the specified groups: all experiments, subgroups per
modality, and whether single or multiple imaging sites were used.
All included studies were eligible for synthesis due to the eligibility
criteria.
To assess the variation that cannot be attributed to sampling
(i.e. heterogeneity), we used Higgins’ I 2 -statistic computed on the
diagnostic odds ratios (DORs) obtained with a univariate randomeffect model 23. As objective measures of heterogeneity have
been argued to be conservative for accuracy studies or
$\textquoterightconfounded\textquoteright by sample size, we supplemented the objective$
measure with a visual inspection of both the univariate randomeffect forest plot and the prediction region of the bivariate
random-effect SROC [24, 25]. The confidence regions for bivariate
syntheses and confidence intervals of DORs were computed at
95% confidence. We also performed a sensitivity analysis by
excluding studies that were judged high risk in any of the
QUADAS-2 domains, as this bias limits certainty in the evidence of
an outcome. Potential sample size effects or publication bias were
assessed using Deek’s test 26.
RESULTS
Study selection and characteristics
The manual selection process is shown in Fig. 1. Our search yielded
774 results, of which 561 were screened after duplicate removal.
After the screening, 339 studies were included for reading, of
which 134 were included in the review [27–160]. The most
common reason for exclusion was the absence of the required
metrics or sufficient information that allows these to be calculated.
In this excluded study, for example, only the AUC and accuracy
were reported 161. Some studies did show the required metrics
but in a figure rather than explicitly in a numeric expression, e.g.,
162. These studies were also excluded. The following studies
reported more than one experiment eligible for inclusion
[28, 29, 49, 52, 57, 60, 62, 67, 68, 74, 77, 79, 85, 93, 121, 129]. A
total of 159 experiments were included.
A plot of the included studies per year and per modality is
provided in Supplementary Materials A4. The number of included
studies increased every year. The characteristics of each experiment are listed in Supplementary Materials B1. It was not possible
to precisely determine the number of unique participants
aggregated over the included studies because some studies did
not mention which participants they selected from publicly
available datasets. By summing the largest samples per dataset
used in an included experiment, we conservatively estimated the
number to be 4982 unique participants consisting of 2439
individuals with ASD and 2543 healthy controls. Of the included
experiments, 88.1% used the Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange
(ABIDE), 5.7% used an in-house sample, 3.1% used the National
Database for Autism Research (NDAR), and 3.1% used other
datasets [163, 164]. A pie chart with an overview is provided in
Supplementary Materials A5. Since ABIDE was used in most of the
included studies, there likely was an overlap between the acquired
samples. Overall, 16.2% of the participants included in the
experiments were female. As not all studies reported the sex
distribution of their sample, this statistic only includes the
experiments that mentioned it.
The majority (74.8%) of included experiments were performed
$on rsfMRI data. Furthermore, 13.8\textbackslash% used sMRI and 3.1\textbackslash% used$
dMRI. Any combination of modalities fell under the category
multimodal, which accounted for 8.2% of the experiments. The
number of experiments is plotted per modality in Supplementary
Materials A6.
Approval for the studies and informed consent from the
subjects are either directly reported in the reviewed papers or the
reviewed papers provide a reference to an online dataset. As
reviewers, we rely on the accuracy of these reports and we do not
have the means to independently verify them.
Translational Psychiatry (2024) 14:318
S.J.C. Schielen et al.
Fig. 1 A flowchart of the selection process, where n indicates the
(https://www.lucidchart.com)
Study assessment
The summary judgments on the risk of bias and the concern
regarding applicability for each study are summarized per domain
in Fig. 2. These summary judgments were based on answers to the
questions of the QUADAS-2 tool, which can be found along with
descriptions in Supplementary Materials B2. No concerns about
applicability were found, likely as a result of the selection criteria.
The vast majority of studies scored an unclear risk of bias in the
domains of the index test and patient selection. In the domain of
the index test, we took a conservative approach to be risk-averse
to potential overfitting. The validation method was deemed high
risk for ten studies, resulting in a summary judgment of high risk.
Furthermore, in most studies, the number of features was not
specified. This often led to an unclear risk of bias.
In the domain of patient selection, many studies gave a
reference to a publicly available dataset without specifying the
information required to answer the questions. Since most studies
selected participants from the dataset, only the reference to the
whole dataset was not reproducible. In this study, for example,
subjects were excluded because of ”incomplete brain coverage,
high motion peaks, ghosting and other scanner artifacts” 80. The
selection criteria ”high motion peaks” and ”other scanner artifacts”
were not reproducible because of subjectivity and incompleteness, respectively. This made it impossible to obtain demographic
0.76
|Col1|rsfMRI<br>sMRI<br>dMRI<br>multimodal<br>summaryestimate<br>SROC<br>confidenceregion<br>predictionr egion|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||||
||||
||||
||||
|||rsfMRI<br>sMRI<br>dMRI<br>multimodal<br>summary estimate<br>SROC<br>confidence region<br>prediction region|
||||
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
False Positive Rate
Fig. 3 Summary receiver operating characteristics curve for all
$included experiments, sensitivity 76.0\textbackslash% (95\textbackslash% CI 74.1\textendash77.8), specificity 75.7\textbackslash% (95\textbackslash% CI 74.0\textendash77.4), AUC 0.823. Uncertainty$
limited the confidence in these results. Note that the axes do not
span from 0 to 1 to aid readability. No data was left out of the figure.
{rsf, s, d}MRI: {resting-state functional, structural, diffusion} magnetic
resonance imaging, SROC summary receiver operating characteristics, AUC area under SROC curve.
Objective measures of heterogeneity (I 2 ) are listed in Table 1.
The objective measures suggested moderate heterogeneity in the
syntheses of all experiments and the subgroups of rsfMRI,
multimodal, and multi-site. The syntheses of the subgroups of
sMRI, dMRI, and single-site suggested no important level of
heterogeneity 24. To supplement the objective measures of
heterogeneity, we visually inspected the prediction region shown
in Fig. 3 and the forest plot of the natural logarithm of the
diagnostic odds ratios shown in Supplementary Materials C1. In
Fig. 3, 31 (19.5% of) experiments were visually scattered outside of
the prediction ellipse, also indicating heterogeneity. The nonoverlapping confidence intervals shown in Supplementary Materials C1 further confirmed moderate heterogeneity in the syntheses
of all experiments and the subgroups of rsfMRI and multimodal. A
larger overlap between the confidence intervals of the subgroup
sMRI indicated that less inter-study variation was captured in this
synthesis. The subgroup dMRI showed near full overlap in
confidence intervals, which indicated no relevant heterogeneity.
When comparing single-site and multi-site experiments, we
observed an overlap between the confidence intervals of singlesite studies that was larger than the overlap between the
confidence intervals of multi-site studies. The larger overlap for
single-site experiments was partly aided by larger confidence
intervals as a result of smaller sample sizes. The absence of this
overlap in multi-site experiments, nevertheless, could not be
attributed to sampling and hence was statistical heterogeneity by
definition.
Deek’s test indicated a statistically significant negative correlation between the diagnostic odds ratio and sample size in all
groups used for synthesis apart from the groups dMRI and singlesite (Supplementary Materials A8). After correcting these results
for multiple comparisons using Bonferroni correction, only the
subgroup of multimodal no longer showed a statistically
significant correlation (P = 0.034). The negative correlation
between the diagnostic odds ratio and sample size indicated
the presence of small-study effects.
The results of the post hoc test on whether the Fisher
transformation of functional connectivity yields better diagnostic
Translational Psychiatry (2024) 14:318
4
S.J.C. Schielen et al.
Fig. 2 Graphical summary of QUADAS-2 assessments. The top figure
shows the risk of bias summary assessments and the bottom figure
shows the level of concern summary assessments.
information like age, sex, or potential comorbidity, even though a
reference to ABIDE was provided. Therefore, we only considered
the information provided in the papers themselves, which often
resulted in questions being answered unclear. In turn, the
summary judgment often resulted in unclear.
Meta-analysis
The main outcome resulted from pooling over all (159) included
experiments. In this quantitative analysis, experiments conducted
using different MRI modalities, disjoint and overlapping patient
samples, and samples obtained with different scanning parameters were included. This resulted in the following summary
estimates for the performance metrics: 76.0% sensitivity (95% CI
74.1–77.8), 75.7% specificity (95% CI 74.0–77.4), and an AUC of
0.823. Uncertainty in study assessment limited the confidence in
these results. The SROC curve, along with its 95% confidence
region and 95% prediction region, is shown in Fig. 3.
The summary estimates of the performance metrics and the
DOR, along with the measure of statistical heterogeneity, are listed
for each of the groups used for synthesis in Table 1. Per group, the
included studies, the number of studies (n) and the number of
studies that scored a high risk of bias in any of the QUADAS-2
domains (n hrob ), and the share of experiments conducted on a
multi-site sample are also listed. Note that the number of studies
included in the single-site and multisite subgroups does not add
up to the total number of studies because two studies did not
specify whether multiple or a single site were used [36, 55]. As
shown in Fig. 2, only high risks of bias occurred in the domains of
the index test and patient selection. A high risk of bias in either of
these domains might result in slightly inflated performance
metrics, as they might generalize poorly to new patients as a
result of selection or being overfitted. A sensitivity analysis was
conducted to assess this impact.
We repeated the primary analyses after excluding the studies
that scored a high risk of bias in any of the QUADAS-2 domains.
The results are listed in Supplementary Materials A7. We observed
no significant changes after excluding high-risk studies, as the
confidence intervals of the sensitivity, specificity, and DOR
significantly overlapped with those listed for the respective
groups in Table 1.
The vast majority of studies scored unclear in the domains of
the index test and patient selection. If we excluded studies that
scored unclear in any of the domains, only two studies remained
[73, 117]. We considered these too few for a separate analysis. Due
to the extent of uncertainty, we have limited confidence in the
results of the syntheses.
S.J.C. Schielen et al.
performance than the Pearson-correlation values are listed in
Supplementary Materials A9. Based on the studies included in this
review, no significantly higher diagnostic odds ratio was observed
for studies that use the Fisher transformation (P = 0.593).
DISCUSSION
We aimed to describe the state of the art in diagnosing ASD with
MRI and found the overall summary estimates of 76.0% sensitivity
$\textendash \textendash$
(95% CI 74.1 77.8), 75.7% specificity (95% CI 74.0 77.4), and an
AUC of 0.823, however, there is limited certainty in these results as
the vast majority of studies scored unclear in at least one of the
assessment domains. Furthermore, we aimed to compare imaging
modalities and analyze statistical heterogeneity.
The modalities included in this review are sMRI, dMRI, rsfMRI,
and multimodal, i.e., any combination of the modalities. It is worth
mentioning that magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) was
originally not considered as we focused on imaging. Still, studies
have shown neurometabolic differences between individuals with
ASD and healthy controls with MRS 165. In a post hoc search
tailored to MRS with the same selection criteria (the terms
magnetic resonance imaging and MRI were respectively replaced
with magnetic resonance spectroscopy and MRS in the search
term), we explored whether studies used these neurometabolic
differences for diagnosis using MRS. This search resulted in
27 studies of which none were eligible. The most common reason
for exclusion was evaluation of group differences rather than
individual-level classification. While these studies were not eligible
per our selection criteria, the neurometabolic differences identified with MRS potentially are a valuable supplement to the
aberrations found with MRI.
As listed in Table 1, the degree of heterogeneity captured in the
subgroups varied greatly. As objective measures of heterogeneity
are debated, we supplemented with visual inspection of the
univariate random-effect forest plot (Supplementary Materials C1)
and the prediction region of the SROC obtained with the bivariate
random-effects model [24, 25]. The visual inspection allowed more
certainty in the objective measures, as we observed the
percentage described by the I 2 -statistic to be proportional to
the visual discrepancies between the confidence intervals in the
forest plot. While we acknowledged that the obtained I 2 -statistics
likely do not exactly describe the degree of heterogeneity
captured in the syntheses, we deemed it sufficient to draw
conclusions based on the visual supplement.
With the observed differences in the degrees of heterogeneity
in mind, we did not consider it appropriate to statistically test
whether one modality was more favorable than another. We
could, for example, compare rsfMRI and sMRI as they were the two
most represented modalities in the meta-analysis. One can
observe a better outcome for the synthesis of sMRI with a
–
sensitivity of 79.9% (95% CI 75.4 83.8) and specificity of 77.7%
$\textendash \textquoteright (95\textbackslash% CI 71.3 83.0) compared to rsfMRI s sensitivity of 74.8\textbackslash%$
$\textendash \textendash$
(72.7 76.8) and specificity of 75.4% (95% CI 73.5 77.1). This
difference might be statistically significant, but conclusions based
on this would not take the captured extent of heterogeneity into
account, making it an ill comparison. Out of the experiments
included in the synthesis for sMRI, 37.9% were multi-site
experiments, whereas the share of multi-site experiments was
77.6% for the synthesis of rsfMRI experiments. There is no
guarantee the diagnostic performance found for the synthesis of
sMRI experiments will hold up when tested to the extent to which
the rsfMRI experiments were tested, which included larger, more
heterogeneous samples. Moreover, most studies scored unclear in
at least one of the QUADAS-2 assessment domains, which
indicates limited confidence in generalization ability.
As the degree of captured heterogeneity varies over the
included studies, it is not straightforward to assess what features
are most valuable for ASD diagnosis. Santana et al. found higher
5
Translational Psychiatry (2024) 14:318
2:1 male-to-female ratio to a 5:1 male-to-female ratio 172. Out of
the included experiments, 88.1% used ABIDE, which is mainly
supplied by American and European sites. Therefore, a limitation
in the evidence is the overlap in the samples, which limits
certainty in the generalization ability toward broader gender
inclusion and ethnic diversity.
Deek’s test was recommended for meta-analyses of diagnostic
test accuracies [26, 173]. We observed a statistically significant
negative correlation between diagnostic accuracy and sample size
for the synthesis on all experiments and the syntheses of the
subgroups rsfMRI, sMRI, and multi-site. No statistically significant
correlations were found for the subgroups dMRI and single-site.
After Bonferroni correction, the correlation found for the subgroup
of multimodal studies was no longer significant. For the plot and
P-values, please refer to Supplementary Materials A8. The
statistically significant correlations showed the presence of
small-study effects, as smaller studies tended to have higher
diagnostic accuracies than larger studies.
The presence of small-study effects may indicate publication
bias. However, the contributions of publication bias and other
forms of heterogeneity cannot always be disentangled in metaanalyses 174. As publication bias is a form of heterogeneity,
small-study effects cannot be explained by only looking at the
measures of heterogeneity, as cause and effect cannot be
disentangled. Considering the proxy for cross-site heterogeneity,
however, a clear distinction is observable between subgroups that
included multi-site experiments (rsfMRI, sMRI, multimodal, and
multi-site) and subgroups that did not (dMRI and single-site). As
researchers are limited in their resources, larger samples are likely
gathered from multi-site cohorts like ABIDE. As described before,
multi-site samples come paired with a larger degree of captured
heterogeneity. This is known to have an adverse effect on the
performance of machine-learning-based algorithms, which in turn
results in lower diagnostic accuracy [167, 168]. While we cannot
completely exclude the possible presence of publication bias, we
think the observed small-study effects are rather an artifact of
cross-site heterogeneity.
We assessed studies using the QUADAS-2 tool of which the full
results are listed in Supplementary Materials B2 and the summary
judgments in Fig. 2 17. The QUADAS-2 tool was tailored to the
review. The questions, together with amendments and rationale, are
reported in Supplementary Materials A3. A limitation of this
approach is that it may have been too risk-averse. Assessing studies’
methodology (the index test) based on two questions is ultimately a
simplification of an approach that may be hard to represent in two
questions. We considered that the number of features should be
proportional to the sample size, as more features than samples are
known to cause overfitting. This is known as the Hughes
phenomenon or the curse of dimensionality [18, 19].
We considered training on a set and testing on a hold-out set
from the same site to be a high risk of bias because it allows
manipulation of the results. There is no transparency in the split
and there is no information on whether the performance will hold
up if different distributions of the set are used for training and
testing. This limitation likely has a small effect on the evidence as
only ten studies were flagged as high risk because of this, which
after sensitivity analysis did not show significant effects in the
synthesis outcomes of any of the analyses.
A high risk of bias in patient selection indicated that the
reported performance might be too specific to the selected
sample. If the index test was judged at a high risk of bias, it
indicated that the methodology was prone to overfitting. Both the
former and the latter domains indicated a risk in the generalization ability of the experiment’s methodology. As all but two
studies scored unclear in at least one of these domains, the main
limitation in the evidence is the uncertainty [73, 117].
This uncertainty was mainly caused by what the authors
explicitly reported. In our review, most studies used ABIDE. Only a
Translational Psychiatry (2024) 14:318
6
S.J.C. Schielen et al.
sensitivity and specificity for studies that used the Fisher
transform of functional connectivity compared to studies that
did not use the transform in their review of rsfMRI 15.
Therefore, we tested if Fisher transformed functional connectivity also led to better diagnostic performance than the studies
that used functional connectivity without Fisher transform in
this review. We did not find significantly higher diagnostic
performance when studies used the Fisher transform (P = 0.593,
Supplementary Materials A9). We cannot conclude that the
Fisher transform is favorable when using functional connectivity
based on the studies we included, but this may be due to the
observed heterogeneity.
To analyze part of the observed heterogeneity, we used
whether an experiment was conducted on a sample gathered
from a single site or multiple sites as a proxy for cross-site
heterogeneity. This can be considered a separate subgroup
analysis, which was one of the suggested approaches 166.
Unseen data obtained in a different way (e.g., different scanning
parameters) were described to introduce variation, which forms an
obstacle to the clinical application of machine-learning-based
approaches [167, 168]. Listed in the “I 2 ” and “share multi-site”
columns of Table 1, the captured heterogeneity I 2 can be
observed to be correlated to the share of multisite experiments.
While this proxy seemed to explain at least a part of the
heterogeneity, it came with limitations. The proxy itself is a
dichotomization of whether one or multiple sites were included in
the experiment’s sample. The degree of heterogeneity caused by
different sites is likely proportional to the number of sites. The
degrees of captured heterogeneity between multi-site samples
varied, which was not accounted for by dichotomizing between
experiments conducted on single-site and multi-site samples. This
meant that although we expected heterogeneity in all multi-site
experiments, the extent differed based on how many different
sites were included. This was not accounted for in the
dichotomization.
In addition, the proxy only accounted for potential variation
between the sites where the samples used for experiments came
from. The syntheses on single-site experiments and dMRI
experiments, respectively showed an I 2 -statistic of 17.3% and
0.0%, which both fell in the range considered not important 24.
Despite that these levels might not be considered important, the
captured heterogeneity in the synthesis of single-site experiments
showed heterogeneity that cannot be attributed to cross-site
effects. This indicates that not all heterogeneity in the multi-site
samples can be attributed to cross-site variation. Despite the
limitations of the proxy, it explained the observable differences in
measured heterogeneity between the syntheses on multi-site and
single-site experiments.
We have used the term heterogeneity mostly in the statistical
sense in this study, but it is universally accepted as a keyword to
describe ASD itself 169. ASD has been described to be
heterogeneous in etiology, phenotypes, and manifestation
170. Therefore, it is likely that any sample will capture some
degree of heterogeneity inherent to ASD, even without the
introduction of cross-site effects. This source of heterogeneity is
likely captured to a larger extent if individuals with different
places on the spectrum are included. If a larger sample is
acquired, it is likely that more of the heterogeneity inherent to
ASD is captured. The heterogeneity inherent to ASD is a possible
explanation of the observed heterogeneity in single-site
experiments. Also, the differences in modalities, methodology,
and patient selection are possible explanations.
Sex differences in ASD were also observed to add to the
inherent heterogeneity [170, 171]. Not all of the included
experiments specified the sex distribution of their samples, but
the aggregated distribution over experiments that did report the
sex distribution is 16.2% female and 83.8% male. This likely is an
effect of the imbalance in prevalence, as estimates range from a
7
reference to ABIDE is insufficient to determine whether inappropriate exclusions were made, comorbidity was avoided, and
whether the sample was continuous or random. Even if
reproducible selection criteria are reported, public databases
may be updated, which invalidates the reproducibility. We
consulted two other systematic reviews that also used the
QUADAS-2 tool [15, 175]. They also reported the vast majority of
studies were at high or uncertain risk of bias in the domain of
patient selection. Therefore, we urge authors to describe the
samples they used for their experiments in the study. This
description should include the distribution of patients and healthy
controls and their sex, age, and other potentially applicable
information like the subject’s intelligence quotient. Information on
how the sample was recruited should also be provided: if it was
continuous or random and how selections were made 17. A
reference to the dataset should not replace this information.
The main obstacles in the way of clinical application are
uncertainty and heterogeneity. While the former may be solved by
making authors aware of what should be reported, the latter
might also benefit from clear communication about specifications.
Efforts have been made to harmonize the data obtained from
different sites, in an attempt to minimize the imaging-protocolinduced heterogeneity 176. Another idea is to not place a
diagnostic tool in a universal framework altogether but to avoid
cross-site heterogeneity by developing locally applied diagnostic
tools [175, 177]. With these ideas in mind, we recommend that
authors start reporting the imaging parameters on which their
system works and the sample used together with its demographic
information. Then, these studies can be assessed in a review which
may outline consistent findings. The combined results may allow
the creation of different protocols that each encompass part of
the heterogeneity rather than a universal protocol that attempts
to solve the heterogeneity altogether.
If heterogeneity’s impact and uncertainty can be sufficiently
reduced, the results look promising. Sensitivity and specificity
of 80% are proposed as the minimum diagnostic performance
required for clinical application [175, 178]. The main summary
estimate of 76.0% sensitivity and 75.7% specificity is not far off
the clinical minimum, especially considering the captured
heterogeneity has an adverse effect on diagnostic performance. The results of the synthesis on single-site experiments
may be more appropriate to compare to the clinical guidelines,
as no small-study effects were found, and the overall degree
captured heterogeneity was lower. These results are very near
the level of clinical application: 79.1% sensitivity and 80.0%
specificity.
While critical assessment of new tools is necessary, we should
not forget that the current diagnostic practice is not perfect. A
systematic review, in which the performance of observation-based
diagnostic methods was compared to the assessment of a multidisciplinary team (considered the gold standard), concluded that
any tool that correctly classifies ASD with 80% accuracy or more
could be considered as accurate as the gold standard 179. This
underscores the need for and importance of an objective
diagnosis based on a measurement. Despite the limitations, the
results obtained in this review approach the level of the gold
standard.
Current efforts of creating an objective diagnostic tool based on
a measurement are usually trained and validated with groundtruth diagnoses obtained with methods prone to subjectivity, e.g.,
following the DSM-5 guidelines. All studies in the review provided
a reference to an online dataset (e.g., ABIDE), or information on
the used reference standard and their selection criteria, hence all
studies scored a low risk of bias in the domain of the reference
standard. These studies are all built upon a selection process that
is more rigorous in distinguishing between individuals with ASD
and healthy controls than diagnostics that are likely routinely
practiced. For example, some studies mentioned using the Autism
Translational Psychiatry (2024) 14:318
S.J.C. Schielen et al.
Diagnostic Observation Schedule-Generic or the Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised, which are rigorous methods but often too
time-consuming to be routinely performed [180, 181].
Based on the additional attention provided to the selection
of individuals for the samples used in the reviewed studies, we
think the effect of subjectivity on the ground-truth labels used
in these studies is minimized. We also see this as an
opportunity for MRI as an objective tool to translate this
rigorous selection effort to practice in a time-efficient way, as it
is trained and validated on these carefully selected data.
Nevertheless, traces of the subjective nature of the current
ground-truth data cannot be excluded completely from
methods trained or validated on them. Therefore, an additional
method of validation may be explored in the future. An
objective diagnosis progressing from one measurement (e.g.,
MRI) could be used to validate an objective diagnosis
progressing from a different measurement (e.g., blood-based)
and vice versa. In this way, MRI and potentially other candidate
objective tests could complement each other, and consensus
between them may further add confidence to the true
diagnosis of the tested individual. An approach like this would
be largely in line with the NIMH’s Research Domain Criteria
initiative, which suggests a framework that accommodates
different objective measurements to complement the current
psychopathological approach 182.
The diagnosis of ASD using MRI shows promise as consistent
findings indicate that biomarkers capable of differentiating
individuals with ASD and healthy controls exist and MRI is able
to capture them. The main obstacles in the way of clinical
application are heterogeneity and uncertainty about generalization. The state of the art in diagnosing ASD using MRI is best
described as potent and desired, but not ready for clinical
application yet.
DATA AVAILABILITY
Data collection forms and data extracted from included studies are publicly available
in the registry and in supplementary materials. All data used for analyses came from
the extracted data. The scripts central to the conclusions in this review are available
[in the registry: https://osf.io/z3aeu. Furthermore, the most represented datasets in](https://osf.io/z3aeu)
the review are publicly available [163, 164].
REFERENCES
1. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders: DSM-5 (American Psychiatric Publishing, 2013).
2. Zeidan J, Fombonne E, Scorah J, Ibrahim A, Durkin MS, Saxena S, et al. Global
prevalence of autism: a systematic review update. Autism Res. 2022;15:778–90.
3. Kuhlthau K, Orlich F, Hall TA, Sikora D, Kovacs EA, Delahaye J, et al. Healthrelated quality of life in children with autism spectrum disorders: results from
the autism treatment network. J Autism Dev Disord. 2010;40:721–9.
4. Stuart M, McGrew JH. Caregiver burden after receiving a diagnosis of an autism
spectrum disorder. Res Autism Spectr Disord. 2009;3:86–97.
5. Hoefman R, Payakachat N, van Exel J, Kuhlthau K, Kovacs E, Pyne J, et al. Caring
for a child with autism spectrum disorder and parents’ quality of life: application
of the carerqol. J Autism Dev Disord. 2014;44:1933–45.
6. Lindly OJ, Shui AM, Stotts NM, Kuhlthau KA. Caregiver strain among north
american parents of children from the autism treatment network registry callback study. Autism. 2022;26:1460–76.
7. Rogge N, Janssen J. The economic costs of autism spectrum disorder: a literature review. J Autism Dev Disord. 2019;49:2873–2900.
8. Kanner L. Autistic disturbances of affective contact. Nervous Child.
1943;2:217–50.
9. Singer E. Diagnosis: redefining autism. Nature. 2012;491:S12–S13.
10. Johnson RA, Barrett MS, Sisti DA. The ethical boundaries of patient and advocate
influence on dsm-5. Har Rev Psychiatry. 2013;21:334–44.
11. Craddock N, Mynors-Wallis L. Psychiatric diagnosis: impersonal, imperfect and
important. Br J Psychiatry. 2014;204:93–95.
12. Insel T, Cuthbert B, Garvey M, Heinssen R, Pine DS, Quinn K, et al. Research
domain criteria (rdoc): toward a new classification framework for research on
mental disorders. Am J Psychiatry. 2010;167:748–51.
39. Cao M, Yang M, Qin C, Zhu X, Chen Y, Wang J, et al. Using deepgcn to identify
the autism spectrum disorder from multisite resting-state data. Biomed Signal
Process Control. 2021;70:103015.
40. Cao P, Wen G, Liu X, Yang J, Zaiane OR. Modeling the dynamic brain network
representation for autism spectrum disorder diagnosis. Med Biol Eng Comput.
2022;60:1897–913.
41. Chen T, Chen Y, Yuan M, Gerstein M, Li T, Liang H, et al. The development of a
practical artificial intelligence tool for diagnosing and evaluating autism spectrum disorder: multicenter study. JMIR Med Inform. 2020;8:e15767.
42. Chen X, Wang Z, Zhan Y, Cheikh FA, Ullah M. Interpretable learning approaches
in structural mri: 3d-resnet fused attention for autism spectrum disorder classification. Proc SPIE. 2022;12033:611–8.
43. Chen Y, Yan J, Jiang M, Zhang T, Zhao Z, Zhao W, et al. Adversarial learning
based node-edge graph attention networks for autism spectrum disorder
identification. In IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems.
2022.
44. Chen Z, Ji J, Liang Y. Convolutional neural network with an element-wise filter to
classify dynamic functional connectivity. In 2019 IEEE International Conference
on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM). 2019; 643-6.
45. Chu Y, Wang G, Cao L, Qiao L, Liu M. Multi-scale graph representation learning
for autism identification with functional mri. Front Neuroinform. 2022;15:
802305.
46. Dammu PS, Bapi RS. Employing temporal properties of brain activity for classifying autism using machine learning. In Pattern Recognition and Machine
Intelligence: 8th International Conference. 2019; 193–200.
47. Dekhil O, Hajjdiab H, Shalaby A, Ali MT, Ayinde B, Switala A, et al. Using resting
state functional mri to build a personalized autism diagnosis system. PLoS ONE.
2018;13:e0206351.
48. Dekhil O, Ali M, El-Nakieb Y, Shalaby A, Soliman A, Switala A, et al. A personalized autism diagnosis cad system using a fusion of structural mri and restingstate functional mri data. Front Psychiatry. 2019;10:392.
49. Deng X, Zhang J, Liu R, Liu K. Classifying asd based on timeseries fmri using
spatial–temporal transformer. Comput Biol Med. 2022;151:106320.
50. Denier N, Steinberg G, van Elst LT, Bracht T. The role of head circumference and
cerebral volumes to phenotype male adults with autism spectrum disorder.
Brain Behav. 2022;12:e2460.
51. Duan Y, Zhao W, Luo C, Liu X, Jiang H, Tang Y, et al. Identifying and predicting
autism spectrum disorder based on multi-site structural mri with machine
learning. Front Human Neurosci. 2022;15:820.
52. Dvornek NC, Li X, Zhuang J, Duncan JS. Jointly discriminative and generative
recurrent neural networks for learning from fMRI. Mach Learn Med Imaging.
2019;11861:382–90.
53. Eill A, Jahedi A, Gao Y, Kohli JS, Fong CH, Solders S, et al. Functional connectivities are more informative than anatomical variables in diagnostic classification of autism. Brain Connect. 2019;9:604–12.
54. El Gazzar A, Cerliani L, van Wingen G, Thomas RM. Simple 1-d convolutional
networks for resting-state fmri based classification in autism. In 2019 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN). 2019:1–6.
55. ElNakieb Y, Soliman A, Mahmoud A, Dekhil O, Shalaby A, Ghazal M, et al. Autism
spectrum disorder diagnosis framework using diffusion tensor imaging. In 2019
IEEE International Conference on Imaging Systems and Techniques (IST).
2019:1–5.
56. Epalle TM, Song Y, Liu Z, Lu H. Multi-atlas classification of autism spectrum
disorder with hinge loss trained deep architectures: ABIDE I results. Appl Soft
Comput. 2021;107:107375.
57. Epalle TM, Song Y, Lu H, Liu Z. Characterizing and identifying autism disorder
using regional connectivity patterns and extreme gradient boosting classifier. In
Neural Information Processing: 26th International Conference. 2019;570–9.
58. Fu Y, Zhang J, Li Y, Shi J, Zou Y, Guo H, et al. A novel pipeline leveraging surfacebased features of small subcortical structures to classify individuals with autism
spectrum disorder. Progr Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2021;104:
109989.
59. Gao J, Chen M, Li Y, Gao Y, Li Y, Cai S, et al. Multisite autism spectrum disorder
classification using convolutional neural network classifier and individual morphological brain networks. Front Neurosci. 2021;14:629630.
60. Gao K, Sun Y, Niu S, Wang L. Unified framework for early stage status prediction
of autism based on infant structural magnetic resonance imaging. Autism Res.
2021;14:2512–23.
61. Guo X, Wang J, Wang X, Liu W, Yu H, Xu L, et al. Diagnosing autism spectrum
disorder in children using conventional mri and apparent diffusion coefficient
based deep learning algorithms. Eur Radiol. 2022;32:761–70.
62. Haghighat H, Mirzarezaee M, Araabi BN, Khadem A. A sex-dependent computeraided diagnosis system for autism spectrum disorder using connectivity of
resting-state fmri. J Neural Eng. 2022;19:056034.
Translational Psychiatry (2024) 14:318
8
S.J.C. Schielen et al.
13. Glover GH. Overview of functional magnetic resonance imaging. Neurosurg Clin.
2011;22:133–9.
14. Soares JM, Marques P, Alves V, Sousa N. A hitchhiker’s guide to diffusion tensor
imaging. Front Neurosci 2013;7:31.
15. Santana C, Carvalho E, Rodrigues I, Bastos G, Souza A, Brito L. rs-fmri and
machine learning for asd diagnosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sci
Rep. 2022;12:6030.
16. Page MJ, Moher D, Bossuyt PM, Boutron I, Hoffmann TC, Mulrow CD, et al.
Prisma 2020 explanation and elaboration: updated guidance and exemplars for
reporting systematic reviews. BMJ. 2021;372:n160.
17. Whiting PF, Rutjes AW, Westwood ME, Mallett S, Deeks JJ, Reitsma JB, et al.
Quadas-2: a revised tool for the quality assessment of diagnostic accuracy
studies. Ann Intern Med. 2011;155:529–36.
18. Maxwell AE, Warner TA, Fang F. Implementation of machine-learning classifi
cation in remote sensing: an applied review. Int J Remote Sens. 2018;39:
2784–817.
19. Berisha V, Krantsevich C, Hahn PR, Hahn S, Dasarathy G, Turaga P, et al. Digital
medicine and the curse of dimensionality. NPJ Digi Med. 2021;4:153.
20. Reitsma JB, Glas AS, Rutjes AW, Scholten RJ, Bossuyt PM, Zwinderman AH.
Bivariate analysis of sensitivity and specificity produces informative summary
measures in diagnostic reviews. J Clin Epidemiol. 2005;58:982–90.
21. Doebler P, Holling H, Sousa-Pinto B. mada: meta-analysis of diagnostic accuracy.
(https://R-Forge.R-project.org/projects/mada/)
22. R Core Team. R: a language and environment for statistical computing. R
(https://www.R-project.org/)
(2023).
23. Higgins JP, Thompson SG, Deeks JJ, Altman DG. Measuring inconsistency in
meta-analyses. BMJ. 2003;327:557–60.
24. Macaskill P, Gatsonis C, Deeks J, Harbord R, Takwoingi Y. Cochrane handbook for
systematic reviews of diagnostic test accuracy. Wiley; 2010.
25. Holling H, Böhning W, Masoudi E, Böhning D, Sangnawakij P. Evaluation of a
new version of i2 with emphasis on diagnostic problems. Commun Stat Simul
Comput. 2020;49:942–72.
26. Deeks JJ, Macaskill P, Irwig L. The performance of tests of publication bias and
other sample size effects in systematic reviews of diagnostic test accuracy was
assessed. J Clin Epidemiol. 2005;58:882–93.
27. Aghdam MA, Sharifi A, Pedram MM. Combination of rs-fmri and smri data to
discriminate autism spectrum disorders in young children using deep belief
network. J Digit Imaging. 2018;31:895–903.
28. Aghdam MA, Sharifi A, Pedram MM. Diagnosis of autism spectrum disorders
in young children based on resting-state functional magnetic resonance
imaging data using convolutional neural networks. J Digit Imaging. 2019;32:
899–918.
29. Ahammed MS, Niu S, Ahmed MR, Dong J, Gao X, Chen Y. Bag-of-features model
for asd fmri classification using svm. In 2021 Asia-Pacific Conference on Communications Technology and Computer Science (ACCTCS); 2021.
30. Ahmed MR, Ahammed MS, Niu S, Zhang Y. Deep learning approached features
for ASD classification using SVM. IEEE Int Conf Artif Intell Inform
Syst.2020:287–90.
31. Al-Hiyali MI, Yahya N, Faye I, Hussein AF. Identification of autism subtypes based
on wavelet coherence of bold fmri signals using convolutional neural network.
Sensors. 2021;21:5256.
32. Al-Hiyali MI, Yahya N, Faye I, Al-Quraishi MS, Al-Ezzi A. Principal subspace of
dynamic functional connectivity for diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder. Appl
Sci. 2022;12:9339.
33. Bernas A, Aldenkamp AP, Zinger S. Wavelet coherence-based classifier: a
resting-state functional mri study on neurodynamics in adolescents with highfunctioning autism. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2018;154:143–51.
34. Bhaumik R, Pradhan A, Das S, Bhaumik DK. Predicting autism spectrum disorder
using domain-adaptive cross-site evaluation. Neuroinformatics. 2018;16:
197–205.
35. Bi X-a, Wu H, Hu X, Fu Y, Peng S. Clustering-evolutionary random support vector
machine ensemble for fmri-based asperger syndrome diagnosis. Comp J.
2022;65:251–60.
36. Bilgen I, Guvercin G, Rekik I. Machine learning methods for brain network
classification: application to autism diagnosis using cortical morphological
networks. J Neurosci Methods. 2020;343:108799.
37. Brahim A, Farrugia N. Graph fourier transform of fmri temporal signals based on
an averaged structural connectome for the classification of neuroimaging. Artif
Intell Med. 2020;106:101870.
38. Byeon K, Kwon J, Hong J, Park H. Artificial neural network inspired by neuroimaging connectivity: application in autism spectrum disorder. In 2020 IEEE
International Conference on Big Data and Smart Computing (BigComp). 2020:
575-8.
9
63. Han Y, Rizzo DM, Hanley JP, Coderre EL, Prelock PA. Identifying neuroanatomical
and behavioral features for autism spectrum disorder diagnosis in children
using machine learning. PLos ONE. 2022;17:e0269773.
64. Hao X, An Q, Li J, Min H, Guo Y, Yu M, et al. Exploring high-order correlations
with deep-broad learning for autism spectrum disorder diagnosis. Front Neu
rosci. 2022;16:1046268.
65. Hu J, Cao L, Li T, Liao B, Dong S, Li P. Interpretable learning approaches in
resting-state functional connectivity analysis: the case of autism spectrum disorder. Comput Math Methods Med. 2020; 2020:1394830.
66. Hu J, Cao L, Li T, Dong S, Li P. Gat-li: a graph attention network based learning
and interpreting method for functional brain network classification. BMC
Bioinformatics. 2021;22:1–20.
67. Hu Z, Wang J, Zhang C, Luo Z, Luo X, Xiao L, et al. Uncertainty modeling for
multicenter autism spectrum disorder classification using takagi–sugeno–kang
fuzzy systems. IEEE Trans Cognitive Dev Syst. 2021;14:730–9.
68. Hu Y, Huang Z-A, Liu R, Xue X, Song L, Tan KC. A dualstage pseudo-labeling
method for the diagnosis of mental disorder on MRI scans. In 2022 International
Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN). 2022:1–8.
69. Huang H, Liu X, Jin Y, Lee S-W, Wee C-Y, Shen D. Enhancing the representation
of functional connectivity networks by fusing multi-view information for autism
spectrum disorder diagnosis. Human Brain Mapp. 2019;40:833–54.
70. Huang Z-A, Zhu Z, Yau CH, Tan KC. Identifying autism spectrum disorder from
resting-state fmri using deep belief network. IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst.
2020;32:2847–61.
71. Huang Z-A, Liu R, Tan KC. Multi-task learning for efficient diagnosis of ASD and
ADHD using resting-state fMRI data. In 2020 International Joint Conference on
Neural Networks (IJCNN). 2020: 1–7.
72. Ingalhalikar M, Shinde S, Karmarkar A, Rajan A, Rangaprakash D, Deshpe G.
Functional connectivity-based prediction of autism on site harmonized abide
dataset. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2021;68:3628–37.
73. Irimia A, Lei X, Torgerson CM, Jacokes ZJ, Abe S, Van Horn JD. Support vector
machines, multidimensional scaling and magnetic resonance imaging reveal
structural brain abnormalities associated with the interaction between autism
spectrum disorder and sex. Front Comput Neurosci. 2018;12:93.
74. Jafadideh AT, Asl BM. Topological analysis of brain dynamics in autism based on
graph and persistent homology. Comput Biol Med. 2022;150:106202.
75. Jain V, Selvaraj A, Mittal R, Rani P, Ramaniharan AK, Ronickom JFA. Automated diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder condition using shape based
features extracted from brainstem. Stud Health Technol Inform.
2022;294:53–7.
76. Jha RR, Bhardwaj A, Garg D, Bhavsar A, Nigam A. Mhatc: Autism spectrum
disorder identification utilizing multi-head attention encoder along with
temporal consolidation modules. In 2022 44th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society (EMBC). 2022:
337–41.
77. Ji J, Yao Y. Convolutional neural network with graphical lasso to extract sparse
topological features for brain disease classification. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol
Bioinform. 2020;18:2327–38.
78. Ji J, Xing X, Yao Y, Li J, Zhang X. Convolutional kernels with an element-wise
weighting mechanism for identifying abnormal brain connectivity patterns.
Pattern Recognit. 2021;109:107570.
79. Ji J, Zhang Y. Functional brain network classification based on deep graph
hashing learning. IEEE Trans Med Imaging. 2022;41:2891–902.
80. Jiang W, Liu S, Zhang H, Sun X, Wang S, Zhao J, et al. CNNG: a convolutional
neural networks with gated recurrent units for asd classification. Front Aging
Neurosci. 2022;14:948704.
81. Jung M, Tu Y, Park J, Jorgenson K, Lang C, Song W, et al. Surface-based shared
and distinct resting functional connectivity in attention-deficit hyperactivity
disorder and autism spectrum disorder. Br J Psychiatry. 2019;214:339–44.
82. Jung W, Heo D-W, Jeon E, Lee J, Suk H-I. Inter-regional high-level relation
learning from functional connectivity via selfsupervision. In Medical Image
Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention–MICCAI 2021: 24th International Conference. 2021: 284–93.
83. Kang E, Heo D-W, Suk H-I. Prototype learning of internetwork connectivity for
asd diagnosis and personalized analysis. In Medical Image Computing and
Computer Assisted Intervention– MICCAI 2022: 25th International Conference.
2022: 334–43.
84. Karampasi AS, Savva AD, Korfiatis VC, Kakkos I, Matsopoulos GK. Informative
biomarkers for autism spectrum disorder diagnosis in functional magnetic
resonance imaging data on the default mode network. Appl Sci. 2021;11:
6216.
85. Kazeminejad A, Sotero RC. Topological properties of restingstate fmri functional
networks improve machine learning-based autism classification. Front Neurosci.
2019;12:1018.
Translational Psychiatry (2024) 14:318
S.J.C. Schielen et al.
86. Kazeminejad A, Sotero RC. The importance of anti-correlations in graph theory
based classification of autism spectrum disorder. Front Neurosci. 2020;
14:676.
87. Ke F, Yang R. Classification and biomarker exploration of autism spectrum disorders based on recurrent attention model. IEEE Access. 2020;8:216298–307.
88. Ke F, Liu H, Zhou M, Yang R, Cao H-M. Diagnostic biomarker exploration of
autistic patients with different ages and different verbal intelligence quotients
based on random forest model. IEEE Access. 2021;9:123861–72.
89. Khadem-Reza ZK, Zare H. Automatic detection of autism spectrum disorder
(asd) in children using structural magnetic resonance imaging with machine
vision system. Middle East Curr Psychiatry. 2022;29:54.
90. Kim JI, Bang S, Yang J-J, Kwon H, Jang S, Roh S, et al. Classification of preschoolers with low-functioning autism spectrum disorder using multimodal mri
data. J Autism Devl Disord. 2022;53:25–37.
91. Kong Y, Gao J, Xu Y, Pan Y, Wang J, Liu J. Classification of autism spectrum
disorder by combining brain connectivity and deep neural network classifier.
Neurocomputing. 2019;324:63–68.
92. Lee J, Kang E, Jeon E, Suk H-I. Meta-modulation network for domain generalization in multi-site fmri classification. In Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention–MICCAI 2021: 24th International Conference. 2021:
500–9.
93. Li H, Parikh NA, He L. A novel transfer learning approach to enhance deep
neural network classification of brain functional connectomes. Front Neurosci.
2018;12:491.
94. Li Q, Becker B, Jiang X, Zhao Z, Zhang Q, Yao S, et al. Decreased interhemispheric functional connectivity rather than corpus callosum volume as a
potential biomarker for autism spectrum disorder. Cortex. 2019;119:258–66.
95. Li J, Wang F, Pan J, Wen Z. Identification of autism spectrum disorder with
functional graph discriminative network. Front Neurosci. 2021;15:1282.
96. Liang Y, Xu G, Rehman SU. Multi-scale attention-based deep neural network for
brain disease diagnosis. Comput Mater Continua. 2022;72:4645–61.
97. Liang Y, Liu B, Zhang H. A convolutional neural network combined with prototype learning framework for brain functional network classification of autism
spectrum disorder. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng. 2021;29:2193–202.
98. Liu Y, Xu L, Li J, Yu J, Yu X. Attentional connectivitybased prediction of autism
using heterogeneous rs-fmri data from cc200 atlas. Exper Neurobiol. 2020;29:27.
99. Liu J, Sheng Y, Lan W, Guo R, Wang Y, Wang J. Improved asd classification using
dynamic functional connectivity and multi-task feature selection. Pattern
Recognit Lett. 2020;138:82–87.
100. Liu R, Huang Z-A, Hu Y, Zhu Z, Wong K-C, Tan KC. Attention-like multimodality
fusion with data augmentation for diagnosis of mental disorders using mri. IEEE
Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst. 2022;35:7627–41.
101. Lu Z, Wang J, Mao R, Lu M, Shi J. Jointly composite feature learning and autism
spectrum disorder classification using deep multi-output takagi-sugeno-kang
fuzzy inference systems. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform. 2022;20:
476–88.
102. Mastrovito D, Hanson C, Hanson SJ. Differences in atypical resting-state effective
connectivity distinguish autism from schizophrenia. Neuroimage Clin. 2018;18:
367–76.
103. Mishra M, Pati UC. Autism spectrum disorder detection using surface morphometric feature of smri in machine learning. In 2021 8th International Conference
on Smart Computing and Communications (ICSCC). 2021:7–20.
104. Mishra M, Pati UC. Autism detection using surface and volumetric morphometric feature of smri with machine learning approach. In Advanced Network
Technologies and Intelligent Computing: First International Conference. 2022:
625-33.
105. Payabvash S, Palacios EM, Owen JP, Wang MB, Tavassoli T, Gerdes M, et al. White
matter connectome edge density in children with autism spectrum disorders:
potential imaging biomarkers using machine-learning models. Brain Connect.
2019;9:209–20.
106. Peng L, Liu X, Ma D, Chen X, Xu X, Gao X. The altered pattern of the functional
connectome related to pathological biomarkers in individuals for autism spectrum disorder identification. Front Neurosci. 2022;16:913377.
107. Peng L, Wang N, Xu J, Zhu X, Li X. Gate: Graph cca for temporal self-supervised
learning for label-efficient fmri analysis. IEEE Trans Med Imaging. 2022;42:
391–402.
108. Prasad PKC, Khare Y, Dadi K, Vinod P, Surampudi BR. Deep learning approach for
classification and interpretation of autism spectrum disorder. In 2022 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN). 2022:1–8.
109. Qiao J, Wang R, Liu H, Xu G, Wang Z. Brain disorder prediction with dynamic
multivariate spatio-temporal features: Application to alzheimer’s disease and
autism spectrum disorder. Front Aging Neurosci. 2022;14:912895.
110. Qin C, Zhu X, Ye L, Peng L, Li L, Wang J, et al. Autism detection based on
multiple time scale model. J Neural Eng. 2022;19:056001.
134. Wang H, Jiang X, De Leone R, Zhang Y, Qiao L, Zhang L. Extracting bold signals
based on time-constrained multiset canonical correlation analysis for brain
functional network estimation and classification. Brain Res. 2022;1775:147745.
135. Wang N, Yao D, Ma L, Liu M. Multi-site clustering and nested feature extraction
for identifying autism spectrum disorder with restingstate fMRI. Med Image
Anal. 2022;75:102279.
136. Wong E, Anderson JS, Zielinski BA, Fletcher PT. Riemannian regression and
classification models of brain networks applied to autism. In Connectomics in
NeuroImaging: Second International Workshop. 2018:78– 87.
137. Xiao Z, Wu J, Wang C, Jia N, Yang X. Computer-aided diagnosis of school-aged
children with asd using full frequency bands and enhanced sae: a multiinstitution study. Exp Ther Med. 2019;17:4055–63.
138. Xing X, Ji J, Yao Y. Convolutional neural network with element-wise filters to
extract hierarchical topological features for brain networks. In 2018 IEEE
International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM). 2018:
780–3.
139. Xu G, Liang Y, Tu S, ur Rehman S. A spatial-temporal integration analysis to
classify dynamic functional connectivity for brain disease diagnosis. In Artificial
Intelligence and Security: 8th International Conference. 2022:549–58.
140. Yamin MA, Tessadori J, Akbar MU, Dayan M, Murino V, Sona D. Geodesic clustering of positive definite matrices for classification of mental disorder using
brain functional connectivity. In 2020 International Joint Conference on Neural
Networks (IJCNN). 2020:1–5.
141. Yang X, Schrader PT, Zhang N. A deep neural network study of the abide
repository on autism spectrum classification. Int J Adv Comput Sci Appl.
2020;11.
142. Yang C, Wang P, Tan J, Liu Q, Li X. Autism spectrum disorder diagnosis using
graph attention network based on spatial-constrained sparse functional brain
networks. Comput Biol Med. 2021;139:104963.
143. Yang R, Ke F, Liu H, Zhou M, Cao H-M. Exploring smri biomarkers for diagnosis of
autism spectrum disorders based on multi class activation mapping models.
IEEE Access. 2021;9:124122–31.
144. Yang M, Cao M, Chen Y, Chen Y, Fan G, Li C, et al. Large-scale brain functional
network integration for discrimination of autism using a 3-d deep learning
model. Front Human Neuroscience. 2021;15:687288.
145. Yi T, Wei W, Ma D, Wu Y, Cai Q, Jin K, et al. Individual brain morphological
connectome indicator based on jensen–shannon divergence similarity estimation for autism spectrum disorder identification. Frontiers in Neuroscience.
2022;16:952067.
146. Yin W, Li L, Wu F-X. A semi-supervised autoencoder for autism disease diagnosis.
Neurocomputing. 2022;483:140–7.
147. Yuan D, Zhu L, Huang H. Prediction of autism spectrum disorder based on
imbalanced resting-state fmri data using clustering oversampling. Tenth International Conference on Signal Processing Systems. 2019;11071:182–6.
148. Zhang F, Savadjiev P, Cai W, Song Y, Rathi Y, Tunç B, et al. Whole brain white
matter connectivity analysis using machine learning: an application to autism.
Neuroimage. 2018;172:826–37.
149. Zhang M, Zhao X, Zhang W, Chaddad A, Evans A, Poline JB. Deep discriminative
learning for autism spectrum disorder classification. In Database and Expert
Systems Applications: 31st International Conference. 2020: 435–43.
150. Zhang L, Wang X-H, Li L. Diagnosing autism spectrum disorder using brain
entropy: A fast entropy method. Comput Methods Programs Biomed.
2020;190:105240.
151. Zhang Z, Zheng W. The discriminative power of white matter microstructures
for autism diagnosis. IFAC-PapersOnLine. 2020;53:446–51.
152. Zhang L, Wang J-R, Ma Y. Graph convolutional networks via low-rank subspace
for multi-site rs-fmri asd diagnosis. In 2021 14th International Congress on
Image and Signal Processing. 2021:1–6.
153. Zhang Y, Peng B, Xue Z, Bao J, Li BK, Liu Y, et al. Self-paced learning and
privileged information based cascaded multi-column classification algorithm for
asd diagnosis. In 2021 43rd Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society (EMBC). 2021:3281–4.
154. Zhang J, Feng F, Han T, Gong X, Duan F. Detection of autism spectrum disorder
using fmri functional connectivity with feature selection and deep learning.
Cognitive Comput. 2022;15:1–12.
155. Zhang F, Wei Y, Liu J, Wang Y, Xi W, Pan Y. Identification of autism spectrum
disorder based on a novel feature selection method and variational auto
encoder. Comput Biol Med. 2022;148:105854.
156. Zhao F, Zhang H, Rekik I, An Z, Shen D. Diagnosis of autism spectrum disorders
using multi-level high-order functional networks derived from resting-state
functional MRI. Front Human Neurosci. 2018;12:184.
157. Zhao F, Chen Z, Rekik I, Lee S-W, Shen D. Diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder
using central-moment features from lowand high-order dynamic resting-state
functional connectivity networks. Front Neurosci. 2020;14:258.
Translational Psychiatry (2024) 14:318
10
S.J.C. Schielen et al.
111. Rakhimberdina Z, Liu X, Murata T. Population graph-based multi-model
ensemble method for diagnosing autism spectrum disorder. Sensors.
2020;20:6001.
112. Rakić M, Cabezas M, Kushibar K, Oliver A, Lladó X. Improving the detection of
autism spectrum disorder by combining structural and functional mri information. Neuroimage Clin. 2020;25:102181.
113. Ronicko JFA, Thomas J, Thangavel P, Koneru V, Langs G, Dauwels J. Diagnostic
classification of autism using resting-state fMRI data improves with full correlation functional brain connectivity compared to partial correlation. J Neurosci
Methods. 2020;345:108884.
114. Saad M, Islam SMR. Brain connectivity network analysis and classifications from
diffusion tensor imaging. In 2019 International Conference on Robotics. 2019:
422–7.
115. Saponaro S, Giuliano A, Bellotti R, Lombardi A, Tangaro S, Oliva P, et al. Multi-site
harmonization of mri data uncovers machine-learning discrimination capability
in barely separable populations: an example from the abide dataset. Neuroimage Clin. 2022;35:103082.
116. Sen B, Borle NC, Greiner R, Brown MR. A general prediction model for the
detection of adhd and autism using structural and functional mri. PLoS ONE.
2018;13:e0194856.
117. Shen MD, Nordahl CW, Li DD, Lee A, Angkustsiri K, Emerson RW, et al. Extra-axial
cerebrospinal fluid in high-risk and normal-risk children with autism aged 2–4
years: a case-control study. Lancet Psychiatry. 2018;5:895–904.
118. Sherkatghanad Z, Akhondzadeh M, Salari S, Zomorodi- Moghadam M, Abdar M,
Acharya UR, et al. Automated detection of autism spectrum disorder using a
convolutional neural network. Front Neurosci. 2020;13:1325.
119. Shi C, Xin X, Zhang J. Domain adaptation using a three-way decision improves
the identification of autism patients from multisite fmri data. Brain Sci.
2021;11:603.
120. Shi C, Xin X, Zhang J. A novel multigranularity featureselection method based
on neighborhood mutual information and its application in autistic patient
identification. Biomed Signal Process Control. 2022;78:103887.
121. Sidhu G. Locally linear embedding and fmri feature selection in psychiatric
classification. IEEE J Trans Eng Health Med. 2019;7:1–11.
122. Song Y, Epalle TM, Lu H. Characterizing and predicting autism spectrum disorder by performing resting-state functional network community pattern analysis. Front Human Neurosci. 2019;13:203.
123. Spera G, Retico A, Bosco P, Ferrari E, Palumbo L, Oliva P, et al. Evaluation of
altered functional connections in male children with autism spectrum disorders
on multiple-site data optimized with machine learning. Front Psychiatry.
2019;10:620.
124. Squarcina L, Nosari G, Marin R, Castellani U, Bellani M, Bonivento C, et al.
Automatic classification of autism spectrum disorder in children using cortical
thickness and support vector machine. Brain Behav. 2021;11:e2238.
125. Subah FZ, Deb K, Dhar PK, Koshiba T. A deep learning approach to predict
autism spectrum disorder using multisite restingstate fmri. Appl Sci. 2021;11:
3636.
126. Sun J-W, Fan R, Wang Q, Wang Q-Q, Jia X-Z, Ma H-B. Identify abnormal
functional connectivity of resting state networks in autism spectrum disorder and apply to machine learning-based classification. Brain Res.
2021;1757:
147299.
127. Supekar K, Ryali S, Yuan R, Kumar D, de Los Angeles C, Menon V. Robust,
generalizable, and interpretable artificial intelligence–derived brain fingerprints
of autism and social communication symptom severity. Biol Psychiatry.
2022;92:643–53.
128. Tang M, Kumar P, Chen H, Shrivastava A. Deep multimodal learning for the
diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder. J Imaging. 2020;6:47.
129. Wang J, Wang Q, Zhang H, Chen J, Wang S, Shen D. Sparse multiview taskcentralized ensemble learning for asd diagnosis based on age-and sex-related
functional connectivity patterns. IEEE Trans Cybernet. 2018;49:3141–54.
130. Wang C, Xiao Z, Wu J. Functional connectivity-based classification of autism and
control using SVM-RFECV on rs-fMRI data. Phys Med. 2019;65:99–105.
131. Wang J, Zhang Y, Zhou T, Deng Z, Huang H, Wang S, et al. Interpretable
feature learning using multi-output takagisugeno- kang fuzzy system for
multi-center asd diagnosis. In Medical Image Computing and Computer
Assisted Intervention–MICCAI 2019: 22nd International Conference. 2019:
790–8.
132. Wang Y, Wang J, Wu F-X, Hayrat R, Liu J. Aimafe: autism spectrum disorder
identification with multi-atlas deep feature representation and ensemble
learning. J Neurosci Methods. 2020;343:108840.
133. Wang C. Indentification of autism spectrum disorder based on an improved
convolutional neural networks. In 2021 3rd International Conference on
Machine Learning. 2021:235–9.
11
158. Zhao M, Yan W, Luo N, Zhi D, Fu Z, Du Y, et al. An attention-based hybrid deep
learning framework integrating brain connectivity and activity of resting-state
functional mri data. Med Image Anal. 2022;78:102413.
159. Zhao F, Han Z, Cheng D, Mao N, Chen X, Li Y, et al. Hierarchical synchronization
estimation of low-and high-order functional connectivity based on sub-network
division for the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder. Front Neurosci. 2022;15:1898.
160. Zu C, Gao Y, Munsell B, Kim M, Peng Z, Cohen JR, et al. Identifying diseaserelated subnetwork connectome biomarkers by sparse hypergraph learning.
Brain Imaging Behav. 2019;13:879–92.
161. Mellema CJ, Treacher A, Nguyen KP, Montillo A. Architectural configurations,
atlas granularity and functional connectivity with diagnostic value in autism
spectrum disorder. In 2020 IEEE 17th International Symposium on Biomedical
Imaging (ISBI). 2020: 1022–5.
162. Huang F, Yang P, Huang S, Ou-Yang L, Wang T, Lei B. Multi-template based autoweighted adaptive structural learning for asd diagnosis. In Machine Learning in
Medical Imaging: 10th International Workshop. 2019: 516–24.
163. Di Martino A, Yan C-G, Li Q, Denio E, Castellanos FX, Alaerts K, et al. The autism
brain imaging data exchange: towards a largescale evaluation of the intrinsic
brain architecture in autism. Mol Psychiatry. 2014;19:659–67.
164. Hall D, Huerta MF, McAuliffe MJ, Farber GK. Sharing heterogeneous data: the
national database for autism research. Neuroinformatics. 2012;10:331–9.
165. Du Y, Chen L, Yan M-C, Wang Y-L, Zhong X-L, Xv C-X, et al. Neurometabolite
levels in the brains of patients with autism spectrum disorders: a meta-analysis
of proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy studies (n= 1501). Mol Psychiatry.
2023;28:3092–103.
166. Higgins JP, Li T. In: Systematic reviews in health research (eds Egger M, Higgins
JP, Smith GD) Ch. 10 (John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2022).
167. Eche T, Schwartz LH, Mokrane F-Z, Dercle L. Toward generalizability in the
deployment of artificial intelligence in radiology: role of computation stress
testing to overcome underspecification. Radiol Artif Intell. 2021;3:e210097.
168. Bahl M. Artificial intelligence in clinical practice: Implementation considerations
and barriers. J Breast Imaging. 2022;4:632–9.
169. Mottron L, Bzdok D. Autism spectrum heterogeneity: fact or artifact? Mol Psychiatry. 2020;25:3178–85.
170. Masi A, DeMayo MM, Glozier N, Guastella AJ. An overview of autism spectrum
disorder, heterogeneity and treatment options. Neurosci. Bull. 2017;33:183–93.
171. Ferri SL, Abel T, Brodkin ES. Sex differences in autism spectrum disorder: a
review. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2018;20:1–17.
172. Lai M-C, Baron-Cohen S, Buxbaum JD. Understanding autism in the light of sex/
gender. Mol Autism. 2015;6:1–5.
173. van Enst WA, Ochodo E, Scholten RJ, Hooft L, Leeflang MM. Investigation of
publication bias in meta-analyses of diagnostic test accuracy: a metaepidemiological study. BMC Med Res Methodol. 2014;14:1–11.
174. Sterne JA, Gavaghan D, Egger M. Publication and related bias in meta-analysis:
power of statistical tests and prevalence in the literature. J Clin Epidemiol.
2000;53:1119–29.
175. Cohen SE, Zantvoord JB, Wezenberg BN, Bockting CL, van Wingen GA. Magnetic
resonance imaging for individual prediction of treatment response in major
depressive disorder: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Transl Psychiatry.
2021;11:168.
176. Yu M, Linn KA, Cook PA, Phillips ML, McInnis M, Fava M, et al. Statistical harmonization corrects site effects in functional connectivity measurements from
multi-site fmri data. Human Brain Mapp. 2018;39:4213–27.
177. Bashyam VM, Doshi J, Erus G, Srinivasan D, Abdulkadir A, Singh A, et al. Deep
generative medical image harmonization for improving cross-site generalization
in deep learning predictors. J Magnet Reson Imaging. 2022;55:908–16.
178. Botteron K, Carter C, Castellanos FX, Dickstein DP, Drevets W, Kim KL, et al.
Consensus report of the apa work group on neuroimaging markers of psychiatric disorders. Am Psychiatr Assoc. 2012.
179. Falkmer T, Anderson K, Falkmer M, Horlin C. Diagnostic procedures in autism
spectrum disorders: a systematic literature review. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2013;22:329–40.
Translational Psychiatry (2024) 14:318
S.J.C. Schielen et al.
180. Lord C, Risi S, Lambrecht L, Cook EH, Leventhal BL, Di Lavore PC, et al. The
autism diagnostic observation schedule—generic: a standard measure of social
and communication deficits associated with the spectrum of autism. J Autism
Dev Disord. 2000;30:205–23.
181. Lord C, Rutter M, Le Couteur A. Autism diagnostic interview revised: a
revised version of a diagnostic interview for caregivers of individuals with
possible pervasive developmental disorders. J Autism Dev Disord. 1994;24:
659–85.
182. Clark LA, Cuthbert B, Lewis-Fernández R, Narrow WE, Reed GM. Three approaches to understanding and classifying mental disorder: Icd-11, dsm-5, and the
national institute of mental health’s research domain criteria (rdoc). Psychol Sci.
Public Interest. 2017;18:72–145.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research is solely funded by Eindhoven University of Technology, Department of
Electrical Engineering.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
SJCS, SZ, and APA conceptualized the study. SJCS and JP independently reviewed
the literature. SJCS performed statistical analyses. JP, SZ, and APA provided
feedback on the methods and the manuscript. SZ and APA provided supervision
to SJCS and JP.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
(https://doi.org/10.1038/s41398-024-03024-5)
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Sjir J. C. Schielen.
[Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/](http://www.nature.com/reprints)
(http://www.nature.com/reprints)
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
© The Author(s) 2024
=== END: s41398-024-03024-5.pdf (10 equations) ===
